<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h2>
			<p>Pan Volodyovski⁠—a famous and seasoned soldier, though a young man⁠—was living, as we have said, in Patsuneli with the patriarch of the place, Pakosh Gashtovt, who had the reputation of being the wealthiest noble among all the small brotherhood of Lauda. In fact, he had dowered richly with good silver his three daughters who had married Butryms, for he gave to each one a hundred thalers, besides cattle, and an outfit so handsome that not one noble woman or family had a better. The other three daughters were at home unmarried; and they nursed Volodyovski, whose arm was well at one time and sore at another, when wet weather appeared in the world. All the Lauda people were occupied greatly with that arm, for Lauda men had seen it working at Shklov and Sepyel, and in general they were of the opinion that it would be difficult to find a better in all Lithuania. The young colonel, therefore, was surrounded with exceeding honor in all the neighborhoods. The Gashtovts, the Domasheviches, the Gostsyeviches, the Stakyans, and with them others, sent faithfully to Patsuneli fish, mushrooms, and game for Volodyovski, and hay for his horses, so that the knight and his servants might want for nothing. Whenever he felt worse they vied with one another in going to Ponyevyej for a barber;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-10" id="noteref-10" epub:type="noteref">10</a> in a word, all strove to be first in serving him.</p>
			<p>Pan Volodyovski was so much at ease that though he might have had more comforts in Kyedani and a noted physician at his call, still he remained in Patsuneli. Old Gashtovt was glad to be his host, and almost blew away the dust from before him, for it increased his importance extremely in Lauda that he had a guest so famous that he might have added to the importance of Radzivill himself.</p>
			<p>After the defeat and expulsion of Kmita, the nobility, in love with Volodyovski, searched in their own heads for counsel, and formed the project of marrying him to Panna Aleksandra. “Why seek a husband for her through the world?” said the old men at a special meeting at which they discussed this question. “Since that traitor has so befouled himself with infamous deeds that if he is now alive he should be delivered to the hangman, the lady must cast him out of her heart, for thus was provision made in the will by a special clause. Let Pan Volodyovski marry her. As guardians we can permit that, and she will thus find an honorable cavalier, and we a neighbor and leader.”</p>
			<p>When this proposition was adopted unanimously, the old men went first to Volodyovski, who, without thinking long, agreed to everything, and then to “the lady,” who with still less hesitation opposed it decisively. “My grandfather alone had the right to dispose of Lyubich,” said she, “and the property cannot be taken from Pan Kmita until the courts punish him with loss of life; and as to my marrying, do not even mention it. I have too great sorrow on my mind to be able to think of such a thing. I have cast that man out of my heart; but this one, even though the most worthy, bring not hither, for I will not receive him.”</p>
			<p>There was no answer to such a resolute refusal, and the nobles returned home greatly disturbed. Less disturbed was Pan Volodyovski, and least of all the young daughters of Gashtovt⁠—Terka, Maryska, and Zonia. They were well-grown, blooming maidens, with hair like flax, eyes like violets, and broad shoulders. In general the Patsuneli girls were famed for beauty; when they went in a flock to church, they were like flowers of the field. Besides, old Gashtovt spared no expense on the education of his daughters. The organist from Mitruny had taught them reading and church hymns, and the eldest, Terka, to play on the lute. Having kind hearts, they nursed Volodyovski sedulously, each striving to surpass the others in watchfulness and care. People said that Maryska was in love with the young knight; but the whole truth was not in that talk, for all three of them, not she alone, were desperately in love with Pan Michael. He loved them too beyond measure, especially Maryska and Zonia, for Terka had the habit of complaining too much of the faithlessness of men.</p>
			<p>It happened often in the long winter evenings that old Gashtovt, after drinking his punch, went to bed, and the maidens with Pan Michael sat by the chimney; the charming Terka spinning flax, mild Maryska amusing herself with picking down, and Zonia reeling thread from the spindle into skeins. But when Volodyovski began to tell of the wars or of wonders which he had seen in the great houses of magnates, work ceased, the girls gazed at him as at a rainbow, and one would cry out in astonishment, “Oh! I do not live in the world! Oh, my dears!” and another would say, “I shall not close an eye the whole night!”</p>
			<p>Volodyovski, as he returned to health and began at times to use his sword with perfect freedom, was more joyous and told stories more willingly. A certain evening they were sitting as usual, after supper, in front of the chimney, from beneath which the light fell sharply on the entire dark room. They began to chat; the girls wanted stories, and Volodyovski begged Terka to sing something with the lute.</p>
			<p>“Sing something yourself,” answered she, pushing away the instrument which Volodyovski was handing her; “I have work. Having been in the world, you must have learned many songs.”</p>
			<p>“True, I have learned some. Let it be so today; I will sing first, and you afterward. Your work will not run away. If a woman had asked, you would not have refused; you are always opposed to men.”</p>
			<p>“For they deserve it.”</p>
			<p>“And do you disdain me too?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, why should I? But sing something.”</p>
			<p>Volodyovski touched the lute; he assumed a comic air, and began to sing in falsetto⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
				<p>
					<span>“I have come to such places</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where no girl will have me!⁠—”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>“Oh, that is untrue for you,” interrupted Maryska, blushing as red as a raspberry.</p>
			<p>“That’s a soldier’s song,” said Volodyovski, “which we used to sing in winter quarters, wishing some good soul to take pity on us.”</p>
			<p>“I would be the first to take pity on you.”</p>
			<p>“Thanks to you. If that is true, then I have no reason to sing longer, and I will give the lute into worthier hands.”</p>
			<p>Terka did not reject the instrument this time, for she was moved by Volodyovski’s song, in which there was more cunning indeed than truth. She struck the strings at once, and with a simpering mien began⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
				<p>
					<span>“For berries of elder go not to the green wood.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Trust not a mad dog, believe not a young man.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each man in his heart bears rank poison;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>If he says that he loves thee, say No.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Volodyovski grew so mirthful that he held his sides from laughter, and cried out: “All the men are traitors? But the military, my benefactress!”</p>
			<p>Panna Terka opened her mouth wider and sang with redoubled energy⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
				<p>
					<span>“Far worse than mad dogs are they, far worse, oh, far worse!”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>“Do not mind Terka; she is always that way,” said Marysia.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-11" id="noteref-11" epub:type="noteref">11</a></p>
			<p>“Why not mind,” asked Volodyovski, “when she speaks so ill of the whole military order that from shame I know not whither to turn my eyes?”</p>
			<p>“You want me to sing, and then make sport of me and laugh at me,” said Terka, pouting.</p>
			<p>“I do not attack the singing, but the cruel meaning of it for the military,” answered the knight. “As to the singing I must confess that in Warsaw I have not heard such remarkable trills. All that would be needed is to dress you in trousers. You might sing at <abbr>St.</abbr> Yan’s, which is the cathedral church, and in which the king and queen have their box.”</p>
			<p>“Why dress her in trousers?” asked Zonia, the youngest, made curious by mention of Warsaw, the king, and the queen.</p>
			<p>“For in Warsaw women do not sing in the choir, but men and young boys⁠—the men with voices so deep that no aurochs could bellow like them, and the boys with voices so thin that on a violin no sound could be thinner. I heard them many a time when we came, with our great and lamented <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i> of Rus, to the election of our present gracious lord. It is a real wonder, so that the soul goes out of a man. There is a host of musicians there: Forster, famous for his subtle trills, and Kapula, and Gian Battista, and Elert, a master at the lute, and Marek, and Myelchevski⁠—beautiful composers. When all these are performing together in the church, it is as if you were listening to choirs of seraphim in the flesh.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, that is as true as if living!” said Marysia, placing her hands together.</p>
			<p>“And the king⁠—have you seen him often?” asked Zonia.</p>
			<p>“I have spoken with him as with you. After the battle of Berestechko he pressed my head. He is a valiant lord, and so kind that whoso has once seen him must love him.”</p>
			<p>“We love him without having seen him. Has he the crown always on his head?”</p>
			<p>“If he were to go around every day in the crown, his head would need to be iron. The crown rests in the church, from which its importance increases; but his Grace the King wears a black cap studded with diamonds from which light flashes through the whole castle.”</p>
			<p>“They say that the castle of the king is even grander than that at Kyedani?”</p>
			<p>“That at Kyedani! The Kyedani castle is a mere plaything in comparison. The king’s castle is a tremendous building, all walled in so that you cannot see a stick of wood. Around are two rows of chambers, one more splendid than the other. In them you can see different wars and victories painted with brushes on the wall⁠—such as the battles of Sigismund <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> and Vladislav; a man could not satisfy himself with looking at them, for everything is as if living. The wonder is that they do not move, and that those who are fighting do not shout. But not even the best artist can paint men to shout. Some chambers are all gold; chairs and benches covered with brocade or cloth of gold, tables of marble and alabaster, and the caskets, bottle-cases, clocks showing the hour of day and night, could not be described on an ox-hide. The king and queen walk through those chambers and delight themselves in plenty; in the evening they have a theatre for their still greater amusement⁠—”</p>
			<p>“What is a theatre?”</p>
			<p>“How can I tell you? It is a place where they play comedies and exhibit Italian dances in a masterly manner. It is a room so large that no church is the equal of it, all with beautiful columns. On one side sit those who wish to see, and on the other the arts are exhibited. Curtains are raised and let down; some are turned with screws to different sides. Darkness and clouds are shown at one moment; at another pleasant light. Above is the sky with the sun or the stars; below you may see at times hell dreadful⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Oh, God save us!” cried the girls.</p>
			<p>“⁠—with devils. Sometimes the boundless sea; on it ships and sirens. Some persons come down from the skies; others rise out of the earth.”</p>
			<p>“But I should not like to see hell,” cried Zonia, “and it is a wonder to me that people do not run away from such a terrible sight.”</p>
			<p>“Not only do they not run away, but they applaud from pleasure,” said Volodyovski; “for it is all pretended, not real, and those who take farewell do not go away. There is no evil spirit in the affair, only the invention of men. Even bishops come with his Grace the King, and various dignitaries who go with the king afterward and sit down to a feast before sleeping.”</p>
			<p>“And what do they do in the morning and during the day?”</p>
			<p>“That depends on their wishes. When they rise in the morning they take a bath. There is a room in which there is no floor, only a tin tank shining like silver, and in the tank water.”</p>
			<p>“Water, in a room⁠—have you heard?”</p>
			<p>“It is true; and it comes and goes as they wish. It can be warm or altogether cold; for there are pipes with spigots, running here and there. Turn a spigot and the water runs till it is possible to swim in the room as in a lake. No king has such a castle as our gracious lord, that is known, and foreign proverbs tell the same. Also no king reigns over such a worthy people; for though there are various polite nations on earth, still God in his mercy has adorned ours beyond others.”</p>
			<p>“Our king is happy!” sighed Terka.</p>
			<p>“It is sure that he would be happy were it not for unfortunate wars which press down the Commonwealth in return for our discords and sins. All this rests on the shoulders of the king, and besides at the diets they reproach him for our faults. And why is he to blame because people will not obey him? Grievous times have come on the country⁠—such grievous times as have not been hitherto. Our most despicable enemy now despises us⁠—us who till recently carried on victorious wars against the Emperor of Turkey. This is the way that God punishes pride. Praise be to Him that my arm works well in its joints⁠—for it is high time to remember the country and move to the field. ’Tis a sin to be idle in time of such troubles.”</p>
			<p>“Do not mention going away.”</p>
			<p>“It is difficult to do otherwise. It is pleasant for me here among you; but the better it is, the worse it is. Let men in the Diet give wise reasons, but a soldier longs for the field. While there is life there is service. After death God, who looks into the heart, will reward best those who serve not for advancement, but through love of the country; and indeed the number of such is decreasing continually, and that is why the black hour has come.”</p>
			<p>Marysia’s eyes began to grow moist; at last they were filled with tears which flowed down her rosy cheeks. “You will go and forget us, and we shall pine away here. Who in this place will defend us from attack?”</p>
			<p>“I go, but I shall preserve my gratitude. It is rare to find such honest people as in Patsuneli. Are you always afraid of this Kmita?”</p>
			<p>“Of course. Mothers frighten their children with him as with a werewolf.”</p>
			<p>“He will not come back, and even if he should he will not have with him those wild fellows, who, judging from what people say, were worse than he. It is a pity indeed that such a good soldier stained his reputation and lost his property.”</p>
			<p>“And the lady.”</p>
			<p>“And the lady. They say much good in her favor.”</p>
			<p>“Poor thing! for whole days she just cries and cries.”</p>
			<p>“H’m!” said Volodyovski; “but is she not crying for Kmita?”</p>
			<p>“Who knows?” replied Marysia.</p>
			<p>“So much the worse for her, for he will not come back. The hetman sent home a part of the Lauda men, and those forces are here now. We wanted to cut him down at once without the court. He must know that the Lauda men have returned, and he will not show even his nose.”</p>
			<p>“Likely our men must march again,” said Terka, “for they received only leave to come home for a short time.”</p>
			<p>“Eh!” said Volodyovski, “the hetman let them come, for there is no money in the treasury. It is pure despair! When people are most needed they have to be sent away. But good night! it is time to sleep, and let none of you dream of Pan Kmita with a fiery sword.”</p>
			<p>Volodyovski rose from the bench and prepared to leave the room, but had barely made a step toward the closet when suddenly there was a noise in the entrance and a shrill voice began to cry outside the door⁠—</p>
			<p>“Hei there! For God’s mercy! open quickly, quickly!”</p>
			<p>The girls were terribly frightened. Volodyovski sprang for his sabre to the closet, but had not been able to get it when Terka opened the door. An unknown man burst into the room and threw himself at the feet of the knight.</p>
			<p>“Rescue, serene Colonel!⁠—The lady is carried away!”</p>
			<p>“What lady?”</p>
			<p>“In Vodokty.”</p>
			<p>“Kmita!” cried Volodyovski.</p>
			<p>“Kmita!” screamed the girls.</p>
			<p>“Kmita!” repeated the messenger.</p>
			<p>“Who art thou?” asked Volodyovski.</p>
			<p>“The manager in Vodokty.”</p>
			<p>“We know him,” said Terka; “he brought herbs for you.”</p>
			<p>Meanwhile the drowsy old Gashtovt came forth from behind the stove, and in the door appeared two attendants of Pan Volodyovski whom the uproar had drawn to the room.</p>
			<p>“Saddle the horses!” cried Volodyovski. “Let one of you hurry to the Butryms, the other give a horse to me!”</p>
			<p>“I have been already at the Butryms,” said the manager, “for they are nearer to us; they sent me to your grace.”</p>
			<p>“When was the lady carried away?” asked Volodyovski.</p>
			<p>“Just now⁠—the servants are fighting yet⁠—I rushed for a horse.”</p>
			<p>Old Gashtovt rubbed his eyes. “What’s that? The lady carried off?”</p>
			<p>“Yes; Kmita carried her off,” answered Volodyovski. “Let us go to the rescue!” Then he turned to the messenger: “Hurry to the Domasheviches; let them come with muskets.”</p>
			<p>“Now, my kids,” cried the old man suddenly to his daughters, “hurry to the village, wake up the nobles, let them take their sabres! Kmita has carried off the lady⁠—is it possible⁠—God forgive him, the murderer, the ruffian! Is it possible?”</p>
			<p>“Let us go to rouse them,” said Volodyovski; “that will be quicker! Come; the horses are ready, I hear them.”</p>
			<p>In a moment they mounted, as did also the two attendants, Ogarek and Syruts. All pushed on their way between the cottages of the village, striking the doors and windows, and crying with sky-piercing voices: “To your sabres, to your sabres! The lady of Vodokty is carried away! Kmita is in the neighborhood!”</p>
			<p>Hearing these cries, this or that man rushed forth from his cottage, looked to see what was happening, and when he had learned what the matter was, fell to shouting himself, “Kmita is in the neighborhood; the lady is carried away!” And shouting in this fashion, he rushed headlong to the outbuildings to saddle his horse, or to his cottage to feel in the dark for his sabre on the wall. Every moment more voices cried, “Kmita is in the neighborhood!” There was a stir in the village, lights began to shine, the cry of women was heard, the barking of dogs. At last the nobles came out on the road⁠—some mounted, some on foot. Above the multitude of heads glittered in the night sabres, pikes, darts, and even iron forks.</p>
			<p>Volodyovski surveyed the company, sent some of them immediately in different directions, and moved forward himself with the rest.</p>
			<p>The mounted men rode in front, those on foot followed, and they marched toward Volmontovichi to join the Butryms. The hour was ten in the evening, and the night clear, though the moon had not risen. Those of the nobles whom the grand hetman had sent recently from the war dropped into ranks at once; the others, namely the infantry, advanced with less regularity, making a clatter with their weapons, talking and yawning aloud, at times cursing that devil of a Kmita who had robbed them of pleasant rest. In this fashion they reached Volmontovichi, at the edge of which an armed band pushed out to meet them.</p>
			<p>“Halt! who goes?” called voices from that band.</p>
			<p>“The Gashtovts!”</p>
			<p>“We are the Butryms. The Domasheviches have come already.”</p>
			<p>“Who is leading you?” asked Volodyovski.</p>
			<p>“Yuzva the Footless at the service of the colonel.”</p>
			<p>“Have you news?”</p>
			<p>“He took her to Lyubich. They went through the swamp to avoid Volmontovichi.”</p>
			<p>“To Lyubich?” asked Volodyovski, in wonder. “Can he think of defending himself there? Lyubich is not a fortress, is it?”</p>
			<p>“It seems he trusts in his strength. There are two hundred with him. No doubt he wants to take the property from Lyubich; they have wagons and a band of led horses. It must be that he did not know of our return from the army, for he acts very boldly.”</p>
			<p>“That is good for us!” said Volodyovski. “He will not escape this time. How many guns have you?”</p>
			<p>“We, the Butryms, have thirty; the Domasheviches twice as many.”</p>
			<p>“Very good. Let fifty men with muskets go with you to defend the passage in the swamps, quickly; the rest will come with me. Remember the axes.”</p>
			<p>“According to command.”</p>
			<p>There was a movement; the little division under Yuzva the Footless went forward at a trot to the swamp. A number of tens of Butryms who had been sent for other nobles now came up.</p>
			<p>“Are the Gostsyeviches to be seen?” asked Volodyovski.</p>
			<p>“Yes, Colonel. Praise be to God!” cried the newly arrived. “The Gostsyeviches are coming; they can be heard through the woods. You know that they carried her to Lyubich?”</p>
			<p>“I know. He will not go far with her.”</p>
			<p>There was indeed one danger to his insolent venture on which Kmita had not reckoned; he knew not that a considerable force of the nobles had just returned home. He judged that the villages were as empty as at the time of his first stay in Lyubich; while on the present occasion counting the Gostsyeviches, without the Stakyans, who could not come up in season, Volodyovski was able to lead against him about three hundred sabres held by men accustomed to battle and trained.</p>
			<p>In fact, more and more nobles joined Volodyovski as he advanced. At last came the Gostsyeviches, who had been expected till that moment. Volodyovski drew up the division, and his heart expanded at sight of the order and ease with which the men stood in ranks. At the first glance it was clear that they were soldiers, not ordinary untrained nobles. Volodyovski rejoiced for another reason; he thought to himself that soon he would lead them to more distant places.</p>
			<p>They moved then on a swift march toward Lyubich by the pinewoods through which Kmita had rushed the winter before. It was well after midnight. The moon sailed out at last in the sky, and lighting the woods, the road, and the marching warriors, broke its pale rays on the points of the pikes, and was reflected on the gleaming sabres. The nobles talked in a low voice of the unusual event which had dragged them from their beds.</p>
			<p>“Various people have been going around here,” said one of the Domasheviches; “we thought they were deserters, but they were surely his spies.”</p>
			<p>“Of course. Every day strange minstrels used to visit Vodokty as if for alms,” said others.</p>
			<p>“And what kind of soldiers has Kmita?”</p>
			<p>“The servants in Vodokty say they are Cossacks. It is certain that Kmita has made friends with Hovanski or Zolotarenko. Hitherto he was a murderer, now he is an evident traitor.”</p>
			<p>“How could he bring Cossacks thus far?”</p>
			<p>“With such a great band it is not easy to pass. Our first good company would have stopped him on the road.”</p>
			<p>“Well, they might go through the forests. Besides, are there few lords travelling with domestic Cossacks? Who can tell them from the enemy? If these men are asked they will say that they are domestic Cossacks.”</p>
			<p>“He will defend himself,” said one of the Gostsyeviches, “for he is a brave and resolute man; but our colonel will be a match for him.”</p>
			<p>“The Butryms too have vowed that even if they have to fall one on the other, he will not leave there alive. They are the most bitter against him.”</p>
			<p>“But if we kill him, from whom will they recover their losses? Better take him alive and give him to justice.”</p>
			<p>“What is the use in thinking of courts now when all have lost their heads? Do you know that people say war may come from the Swedes?”</p>
			<p>“May God preserve us from that! The Moscow power and Hmelnitski at present; only the Swedes are wanting, and then the last day of the Commonwealth.”</p>
			<p>At this moment Volodyovski riding in advance turned and said, “Quiet there, gentlemen!”</p>
			<p>The nobles grew silent, for Lyubich was in sight. In a quarter of an hour they had come within less than forty rods of the building. All the windows were illuminated; the light shone into the yard, which was full of armed men and horses. Nowhere sentries, no precautions⁠—it was evident that Kmita trusted too much in his strength. When he had drawn still nearer, Pan Volodyovski with one glance recognized the Cossacks against whom he had warred so much during the life of the great Yeremi, and later under Radzivill.</p>
			<p>“If those are strange Cossacks, then that ruffian has passed the limit.”</p>
			<p>He looked farther; brought his whole party to a halt. There was a terrible bustle in the court. Some Cossacks were giving light with torches; others were running in every direction, coming out of the house and going in again, bringing out things, packing bags into the wagons; others were leading horses from the stable, driving cattle from the stalls. Cries, shouts, commands, crossed one another in every direction. The gleam of torches lighted as it were the moving of a tenant to a new estate on <abbr>St.</abbr> John’s Eve.</p>
			<p>Kryshtof, the oldest among the Domasheviches, pushed up to Volodyovski and said, “They want to pack all Lyubich into wagons.”</p>
			<p>“They will take away,” answered Volodyovski, “neither Lyubich nor their own skins. I do not recognize Kmita, who is an experienced soldier. There is not a single sentry.”</p>
			<p>“Because he has great force⁠—it seems to me more than three hundred strong. If we had not returned he might have passed with the wagons through all the villages.”</p>
			<p>“Is this the only road to the house?” asked Volodyovski.</p>
			<p>“The only one, for in the rear are ponds and swamps.”</p>
			<p>“That is well. Dismount!”</p>
			<p>Obedient to this command, the nobles sprang from their saddles. The rear ranks of infantry deployed in a long line, and began to surround the house and the buildings. Volodyovski with the main division advanced directly on the gate.</p>
			<p>“Wait the command!” said he, in a low voice. “Fire not before the order.”</p>
			<p>A few tens of steps only separated the nobles from the gate when they were seen at last from the yard. Men sprang at once to the fence, bent forward, and peering carefully into the darkness, called threateningly, “Hei! Who are there?”</p>
			<p>“Halt!” cried Volodyovski; “fire!”</p>
			<p>Shots from all the guns which the nobles carried thundered together; but the echo had not come back from the building when the voice of Volodyovski was heard again: “On the run!”</p>
			<p>“Kill! slay!” cried the Lauda men, rushing forward like a torrent.</p>
			<p>The Cossacks answered with shots, but they had not time to reload. The throng of nobles rushed against the gate, which soon fell before the pressure of armed men. A struggle began to rage in the yard, among the wagons, horses, and bags. The powerful Butryms, the fiercest in hand-to-hand conflict and the most envenomed against Kmita, advanced in line. They went like a herd of stags bursting through a growth of young trees, breaking, trampling, destroying, and cutting wildly. Alter them rolled the Domasheviches and the Gostsyeviches.</p>
			<p>Kmita’s Cossacks defended themselves manfully from behind the wagons and packs; they began to fire too from all the windows of the house and from the roof⁠—but rarely, for the trampled torches were quenched, and it was difficult to distinguish their own from the enemy. After a while the Cossacks were pushed from the yard and the house to the stables; cries for quarter were heard. The nobles had triumphed.</p>
			<p>But when they were alone in the yard, fire from the house increased at once. All the windows were bristling with muskets, and a storm of bullets began to fall on the yard. The greater part of the Cossacks had taken refuge in the house.</p>
			<p>“To the doors!” cried Volodyovski.</p>
			<p>In fact, the discharges from the windows and from the roof could not injure those at the very walls. The position, however, of the besiegers was difficult. They could not think of storming the windows, for fire would greet them straight in the face. Volodyovski therefore commanded to hew down the doors. But that was not easy, for they were bolts rather than doors, made of oak pieces fixed crosswise and fastened with many gigantic nails, on the strong heads of which axes were dented without breaking the doors. The most powerful men pushed then from time to time with their shoulders, but in vain. Behind the doors wore iron bars, and besides they were supported inside by props. But the Butryms hewed with rage. At the doors of the kitchen leading also to the storehouse the Domasheviches and Gashtovts were storming.</p>
			<p>After vain efforts of an hour the men at the axes were relieved. Some crosspieces had fallen, but in place of them appeared gun-barrels. Shots sounded again. Two Butryms fell to the ground with pierced breasts. The others, instead of being put to disorder, hewed still more savagely.</p>
			<p>By command of Volodyovski the openings were stopped with bundles of coats. Now in the direction of the road new shouts were heard from the Stakyans, who had come to the aid of their brethren; and following them were armed peasants from Vodokty.</p>
			<p>The arrival of these reinforcements had evidently disturbed the besieged, for straightway a voice behind the door called loudly: “Stop there! do not hew! listen! Stop, a hundred devils take you! let us talk.”</p>
			<p>Volodyovski gave orders to stop the work and asked; “Who is speaking?”</p>
			<p>“The banneret of Orsha, Kmita; and with whom am I speaking?”</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Col.</abbr> Michael Volodyovski.”</p>
			<p>“With the forehead!” answered the voice from behind the door.</p>
			<p>“There is no time for greetings. What is your wish?”</p>
			<p>“It would be more proper for me to ask what you want. You do not know me, nor I you; why attack me?”</p>
			<p>“Traitor!” cried Volodyovski. “With me are the men of Lauda who have returned from the war, and they have accounts with you for robbery, for blood shed without cause and for the lady whom you have carried away. But do you know what <i xml:lang="la">raptus puellae</i> means? You must yield your life.”</p>
			<p>A moment of silence followed.</p>
			<p>“You would not call me traitor a second time,” said Kmita, “were it not for the door between us.”</p>
			<p>“Open it, then! I do not hinder.”</p>
			<p>“More than one dog from Lauda will cover himself with his legs before it is open. You will not take me alive.”</p>
			<p>“Then we will drag you out dead, by the hair. All one to us!”</p>
			<p>“Listen with care, note what I tell you! If you do not let us go, I have a barrel of powder here, and the match is burning already. I’ll blow up the house and all who are in it with myself, so help me God! Come now and take me!”</p>
			<p>This time a still longer silence followed. Volodyovski sought an answer in vain. The nobles began to look at one another in fear. There was so much wild energy in the words of Kmita that all believed his threat. The whole victory might be turned into dust by one spark, and Panna Billevich lost forever.</p>
			<p>“For God’s sake!” muttered one of the Butryms, “he is a madman. He is ready to do what he says.”</p>
			<p>Suddenly a happy thought came to Volodyovski, as it seemed to him. “There is another way!” cried he. “Meet me, traitor, with a sabre. If you put me down, you will go away in freedom.”</p>
			<p>For a time there was no answer. The hearts of the Lauda men beat unquietly.</p>
			<p>“With a sabre?” asked Kmita, at length. “Can that be?”</p>
			<p>“If you are not afraid, it will be.”</p>
			<p>“The word of a cavalier that I shall go away in freedom?”</p>
			<p>“The word⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Impossible!” cried a number of voices among the Butryms.</p>
			<p>“Quiet, a hundred devils!” roared Volodyovski; “if not, then let him blow you up with himself.”</p>
			<p>The Butryms were silent; after a while one of them said, “Let it be as you wish.”</p>
			<p>“Well, what is the matter there?” asked Kmita, derisively. “Do the gray coats agree?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, and they will take oath on their swords, if you wish.”</p>
			<p>“Let them take oath.”</p>
			<p>“Come together, gentlemen, come together!” cried Volodyovski to the nobles who were standing under the walls and surrounding the whole house.</p>
			<p>After a while all collected at the main door, and soon the news that Kmita wanted to blow himself up with powder spread on every side. They were as if petrified with terror. Meanwhile Volodyovski raised his voice and said amid silence like that of the grave⁠—</p>
			<p>“I take you all present here to witness that I have challenged Pan Kmita, the banneret of Orsha, to a duel, and I have promised that if he puts me down he shall go hence in freedom, without obstacle from you; to this you must swear on your sword-hilts, in the name of God and the holy cross⁠—”</p>
			<p>“But wait!” cried Kmita⁠—“in freedom with all my men, and I take the lady with me.”</p>
			<p>“The lady will remain here,” answered Volodyovski, “and the men will go as prisoners to the nobles.”</p>
			<p>“That cannot be.”</p>
			<p>“Then blow yourself up with powder! We have already mourned for her; as to the men, ask them what they prefer.”</p>
			<p>Silence followed.</p>
			<p>“Let it be so,” said Kmita, after a time. “If I do not take her today, I will in a month. You will not hide her under the ground! Take the oath!”</p>
			<p>“Take the oath!” repeated Volodyovski.</p>
			<p>“We swear by the Most High God and the Holy Cross. Amen!”</p>
			<p>“Well, come out, come out!” cried Volodyovski.</p>
			<p>“You are in a hurry to the other world?”</p>
			<p>“No matter, no matter, only come out quickly.”</p>
			<p>The iron bars holding the door on the inside began to groan.</p>
			<p>Volodyovski pushed back, and with him the nobles, to make room. Soon the door opened, and in it appeared Pan Andrei, tall, straight as a poplar. The dawn was already coming, and the first pale light of day fell on his daring, knightly, and youthful face. He stopped in the door, looked boldly on the crowd of nobles, and said⁠—</p>
			<p>“I have trusted in you. God knows whether I have done well, but let that go. Who here is Pan Volodyovski?”</p>
			<p>The little colonel stepped forward. “I am!” answered he.</p>
			<p>“Oh! you are not like a giant,” said Kmita, with sarcastic reference to Volodyovski’s stature, “I expected to find a more considerable figure, though I must confess you are evidently a soldier of experience.”</p>
			<p>“I cannot say the same of you, for you have neglected sentries. If you are the same at the sabre as at command, I shall not have work.”</p>
			<p>“Where shall we fight?” asked Kmita, quickly.</p>
			<p>“Here⁠—the yard is as level as a table.”</p>
			<p>“Agreed! Prepare for death.”</p>
			<p>“Are you so sure?”</p>
			<p>“It is clear that you have never been in Orsha, since you doubt. Not only am I sure, but I am sorry, for I have heard of you as a splendid soldier. Therefore I say for the last time, let me go! We do not know each other; why should we stand the one in the way of the other? Why attack me? The maiden is mine by the will, as well as this property; and God knows I am only seeking my own. It is true that I cut down the nobles in Volmontovichi, but let God decide who committed the first wrong. Whether my officers were men of violence or not, we need not discuss; it is enough that they did no harm to anyone here, and they were slaughtered to the last man because they wanted to dance with girls in a public house. Well, let blood answer blood! After that my soldiers were cut to pieces. I swear by the wounds of God that I came to these parts without evil intent, and how was I received? But let wrong balance wrong, I will still add from my own and make losses good in neighbor fashion. I prefer that to another way.”</p>
			<p>“And what kind of people have you here? Where did you get these assistants?” asked Volodyovski.</p>
			<p>“Where I got them I got them. I did not bring them against the country, but to obtain my own rights.”</p>
			<p>“Is that the kind of man you are? So for private affairs you have joined the enemy. And with what have you paid him for this service, if not with treason? No, brother, I should not hinder you from coming to terms with the nobles, but to call in the enemy is another thing. You will not creep out. Stand up now, stand up, or I shall say that you are a coward, though you give yourself out as a master from Orsha.”</p>
			<p>“You would have it,” said Kmita, taking position.</p>
			<p>But Volodyovski did not hurry, and not taking his sabre out yet, he looked around on the sky. Day was already coming in the east. The first golden and azure stripes were extended in a belt of light, but in the yard it was still gloomy enough, and just in front of the house complete darkness reigned.</p>
			<p>“The day begins well,” said Volodyovski, “but the sun will not rise soon. Perhaps you would wish to have light?”</p>
			<p>“It is all one to me.”</p>
			<p>“Gentlemen!” cried Volodyovski, turning to the nobles, “go for some straw and for torches; it will be clearer for us in this Orsha dance.”</p>
			<p>The nobles, to whom this humorous tone of the young colonel gave wonderful consolation, rushed quickly to the kitchen. Some of them fell to collecting the torches trampled at the time of the battle, and in a little while nearly fifty red flames were gleaming in the semidarkness of the early morning.</p>
			<p>Volodyovski showed them with his sabre to Kmita. “Look, a regular funeral procession!”</p>
			<p>And Kmita answered at once: “They are burying a colonel, so there must be parade.”</p>
			<p>“You are a dragon!”</p>
			<p>Meanwhile the nobles formed in silence a circle around the knights, and raised the burning torches aloft; behind them others took their places, curious and disquieted; in the centre the opponents measured each other with their eyes. A grim silence began; only burned coals fell with a crackle to the ground. Volodyovski was as lively as a goldfinch on a bright morning.</p>
			<p>“Begin!” said Kmita.</p>
			<p>The first clash raised an echo in the heart of every onlooker. Volodyovski struck as if unwillingly; Kmita warded and struck in his turn; Volodyovski warded. The dry clash grew more rapid. All held breath. Kmita attacked with fury. Volodyovski put his left hand behind his back and stood quietly, making very careless, slight, almost imperceptible movements; it seemed that he wished merely to defend himself, and at the same time spare his opponent. Sometimes he pushed a short step backward, again he advanced; apparently he was studying the skill of Kmita. Kmita was growing heated; Volodyovski was cool as a master testing his pupil, and all the time calmer and calmer. At last, to the great surprise of the nobles, he said⁠—</p>
			<p>“Now let us talk; it will not last long. Ah, ha! is that the Orsha method? ’Tis clear that you must have threshed peas there, for you strike like a man with a flail. Terrible blows! Are they really the best in Orsha? That thrust is in fashion only among tribunal police. This is from Courland, good to chase dogs with. Look to the end of your sabre! Don’t bend your hand so, for see what will happen! Raise your sabre!”</p>
			<p>Volodyovski pronounced the last words with emphasis; at the same time he described a half-circle, drew the hand and sabre toward him, and before the spectators understood what “raise” meant, Kmita’s sabre, like a needle pulled from a thread, flew above Volodyovski’s head and fell behind his shoulders; then he said⁠—</p>
			<p>“That is called shelling a sabre.”</p>
			<p>Kmita stood pale, wild-eyed, staggering, astonished no less than the nobles of Lauda; the little colonel pushed to one side, and repeated again⁠—</p>
			<p>“Take your sabre!”</p>
			<p>For a time it seemed as if Kmita would rush at him with naked hands. He was just ready for the spring, when Volodyovski put his hilt to his own breast, presenting the point. Kmita rushed to take his own sabre, and fell with it again on his terrible opponent.</p>
			<p>A loud murmur rose from the circle of spectators, and the ring grew closer and closer. Kmita’s Cossacks thrust their heads between the shoulders of the nobles, as if they had lived all their lives in the best understanding with them. Involuntarily shouts were wrested from the mouths of the onlookers; at times an outburst of unrestrained, nervous laughter was heard; all acknowledged a master of masters.</p>
			<p>Volodyovski amused himself cruelly like a cat with a mouse, and seemed to work more and more carelessly with the sabre. He took his left hand from behind his back and thrust it into his trousers’ pocket. Kmita was foaming at the mouth, panting heavily; at last hoarse words came from his throat through his set lips⁠—</p>
			<p>“Finish⁠—spare the shame!”</p>
			<p>“Very well!” replied Volodyovski.</p>
			<p>A short terrible whistle was heard, then a smothered cry. At the same moment Kmita threw open his arms, his sabre dropped to the ground, and he fell on his face at the feet of the colonel.</p>
			<p>“He lives!” said Volodyovski; “he has not fallen on his back!” And doubling the skirt of Kmita’s coat, he began to wipe his sabre.</p>
			<p>The nobles shouted with one voice, and in those shouts thundered with increasing clearness: “Finish the traitor! finish him! cut him to pieces!”</p>
			<p>A number of Butryms ran up with drawn sabres. Suddenly something wonderful happened⁠—and one would have said that little Volodyovski had grown tall before their eyes: the sabre of the nearest Butrym flew out of his hand after Kmita’s, as if a whirlwind had caught it, and Volodyovski shouted with flashing eyes⁠—</p>
			<p>“Stand back, stand back! He is mine now, not yours! Be off!”</p>
			<p>All were silent, fearing the anger of that man; and he said: “I want no shambles here! As nobles you should understand knightly customs, and not slaughter the wounded. Enemies do not do that, and how could a man in a duel kill his prostrate opponent?”</p>
			<p>“He is a traitor!” muttered one of the Butryms. “It is right to kill such a man.”</p>
			<p>“If he is a traitor he should be given to the hetman to suffer punishment and serve as an example to others. But as I have said, he is mine now, not yours. If he recovers you will be free to get your rights before a court, and it will be easier to obtain satisfaction from a living than a dead man. Who here knows how to dress wounds?”</p>
			<p>“Krysh Domashevich. He has attended to all in Lauda for years.”</p>
			<p>“Let him dress the man at once, then take him to bed, and I will go to console the ill-fated lady.”</p>
			<p>So saying, Volodyovski put his sabre into the scabbard. The nobles began to seize and bind Kmita’s men, who henceforth were to plough land in the villages. They surrendered without resistance; only a few who had escaped through the rear windows of the house ran toward the ponds, but they fell into the hands of the Stakyans who were stationed there. At the same time the nobles fell to plundering the wagons, in which they found quite a plentiful booty; some of them gave advice to sack the house, but they feared Pan Volodyovski, and perhaps the presence of Panna Billevich restrained the most daring. Their own killed, among whom were three Butryms and two Domasheviches, the nobles put into wagons, so as to bury them according to Christian rites. They ordered the peasants to dig a ditch for Kmita’s dead behind the garden.</p>
			<p>Volodyovski in seeking the lady burst through the whole house, and found her at last in the treasure-chamber situated in a corner to which a low and narrow door led from the sleeping-room. It was a small chamber, with narrow, strongly barred windows, built in a square and with such mighty walls, that Volodyovski saw at once that even if Kmita had blown up the house with powder that room would have surely remained unharmed. This gave him a better opinion of Kmita. The lady was sitting on a chest not far from the door, with her head drooping, and her face almost hidden by her hair. She did not raise it when she heard the knight coming. She thought beyond doubt that it was Kmita himself or some one of his people. Pan Volodyovski stood in the door, coughed once, a second time, and seeing no result from that, said⁠—</p>
			<p>“My lady, you are free!”</p>
			<p>“From under the drooping hair blue eyes looked at the knight, and then a comely face appeared, though pale and as it were not conscious. Volodyovski was hoping for thanks, an outburst of gladness; but the lady sat motionless, distraught, and merely looked at him. Therefore the knight spoke again⁠—</p>
			<p>“Come to yourself, my lady! God has regarded innocence⁠—you are free, and can return to Vodokty.”</p>
			<p>This time there was more consciousness in the look of Panna Billevich. She rose from the chest, shook back her hair, and asked, “Who are you?”</p>
			<p>“Michael Volodyovski, colonel of dragoons with the <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i> of Vilna.”</p>
			<p>“Did I hear a battle⁠—shots? Tell me.”</p>
			<p>“Yes. We came to save you.”</p>
			<p>She regained her senses completely. “I thank you,” said she hurriedly, with a low voice, through which a mortal disquiet was breaking. “But what happened to him?”</p>
			<p>“To Kmita? Fear not, my lady! He is lying lifeless in the yard; and without praising myself I did it.”</p>
			<p>Volodyovski uttered this with a certain boastfulness; but if he expected admiration he deceived himself terribly. She said not a word, but tottered and began to seek support behind with her hands. At last she sat heavily on the same chest from which she had risen a moment before.</p>
			<p>The knight sprang to her quickly: “What is the matter, my lady?”</p>
			<p>“Nothing, nothing⁠—wait, permit me. Then is Pan Kmita killed?”</p>
			<p>“What is Pan Kmita to me?” interrupted Volodyovski; “it is a question here of you.”</p>
			<p>That moment her strength came back; for she rose again, and looking him straight in the eyes, screamed with anger, impatience, and despair: “By the living God, answer! Is he killed?”</p>
			<p>“Pan Kmita is wounded,” answered the astonished Volodyovski.</p>
			<p>“Is he alive?”</p>
			<p>“He is alive.”</p>
			<p>“It is well! I thank you.”</p>
			<p>And with step still tottering she moved toward the door. Volodyovski stood for a while moving his mustaches violently and shaking his head; then he muttered to himself, “Does she thank me because Kmita is wounded, or because he is alive?”</p>
			<p>He followed Olenka, and found her in the adjoining bed room standing in the middle of it as if turned to stone. Four nobles were bearing in at that moment Pan Kmita; the first two advancing sidewise appeared in the door, and between them hung toward the floor the pale head of Pan Andrei, with closed eyes, and clots of black blood in his hair.</p>
			<p>“Slowly,” said Krysh Domashevich, walking behind, “slowly across the threshold. Let someone hold his head. Slowly!”</p>
			<p>“With what can we hold it when our hands are full?” answered those in front.</p>
			<p>At that moment Panna Aleksandra approached them, pale as was Kmita himself, and placed both hands under his lifeless head.</p>
			<p>“This is the lady,” said Krysh Domashevich.</p>
			<p>“It is I. Be careful!” answered she, in a low voice.</p>
			<p>Volodyovski looked on, and his mustaches quivered fearfully.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile they placed Kmita on the bed. Krysh Domashevich began to wash his head with water; then he fixed a plaster previously prepared to the wound, and said⁠—</p>
			<p>“Now let him lie quietly. Oh, that’s an iron head not to burst from such a blow! He may recover, for he is young. But he got it hard.”</p>
			<p>Then he turned to Olenka: “Let me wash your hands⁠—here is water. A kind heart is in you that you were not afraid to put blood on yourself for that man.”</p>
			<p>Speaking thus, he wiped her palms with a cloth; but she grew pale and changed in the eyes.</p>
			<p>Volodyovski sprang to her again: “There is nothing here for you, my lady. You have shown Christian charity to an enemy; return home.” And he offered her his arm.</p>
			<p>She however, did not look at him, but turning to Krysh Domashevich, said, “Pan Kryshtof, conduct me.”</p>
			<p>Both went out, and Volodyovski followed them. In the yard the nobles began to shout at sight of her, and cry, “Vivat!” But she went forward, pale, staggering, with compressed lips, and with fire in her eyes.</p>
			<p>“Long life to our lady! Long life to our colonel!” cried powerful voices.</p>
			<p>An hour later Volodyovski returned at the head of the Lauda men toward the villages. The sun had risen already; the early morning in the world was gladsome, a real spring morning. The Lauda men clattered forward in a formless crowd along the highway, discussing the events of the night and praising Volodyovski to the skies; but he rode on thoughtful and silent. Those eyes looking from behind the dishevelled hair did not leave his mind, nor that slender form, imposing though bent by grief and pain.</p>
			<p>“It is a marvel what a wonder she is,” said he to himself⁠—“a real princess! I have saved her honor and surely her life, for though the powder would not have blown up the treasure-room she would have died of pure fright. She ought to be grateful. But who can understand a fair head? She looked on me as on some serving-lad, I know not whether from haughtiness or perplexity.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
