<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-13" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</h2>
			<p>When Pan Skshetuski with his cousin Stanislav and Zagloba, after a toilsome journey from the wilderness, came at last to Upita, Pan Volodyovski went almost wild from delight, especially since he had long had no news of them; he thought that Yan was with a squadron of the king which he commanded under the hetmans in the Ukraine.</p>
			<p>Pan Michael took them in turn by the shoulders, and after he had pressed them once he pressed them again and rubbed his hands. When they told him of their wish to serve under Radzivill, he rejoiced still more at the thought that they would not separate soon.</p>
			<p>“Praise God that we shall be together, old comrades of Zbaraj!” said he. “A man has greater desire for war when he feels friends near him.”</p>
			<p>“That was my idea,” said Zagloba; “for they wanted to fly to the king. But I said, ‘Why not remember old times with Pan Michael? If God will give us such fortune as he did with Cossacks and the Tartars, we shall soon have more than one Swede on our conscience.’ ”</p>
			<p>“God inspired you with that thought,” said Pan Michael.</p>
			<p>“But it is a wonder to me,” added Yan, “how you know already of the war. Stanislav came to me with the last breath of his horse, and we in that same fashion rode hither, thinking that we should be first to announce the misfortune.”</p>
			<p>“The tidings must have come through the Jews,” said Zagloba; “for they are first to know everything, and there is such communication between them that if one sneezes in Great Poland in the morning, others will call to him in the evening from Lithuania and the Ukraine, ‘To thy health!’ ”</p>
			<p>“I know not how it was, but we heard of it two days ago,” said Pan Michael, “and there is a fearful panic here. The first day we did not credit the news greatly, but on the second no one denied it. I will say more; before the war came, you would have said that the birds were singing about it in the air, for suddenly and without cause all began to speak of war. Our prince <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i> must also have looked for it and have known something before others, for he was rushing about like a fly in hot water, and during these last hours he has hastened to Kyedani. Levies were made at his order two months ago. I assembled men, as did also Stankyevich and a certain Kmita, the banneret of Orsha, who, as I hear, has already sent a squadron to Kyedani. Kmita was ready before the rest of us.”</p>
			<p>“Michael, do you know Prince Radzivill well?” asked Yan.</p>
			<p>“Why should I not know him, when I have passed the whole present war<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-17" id="noteref-17" epub:type="noteref">17</a> under his command?”</p>
			<p>“What do you know of his plans? Is he an honest man?”</p>
			<p>“He is a finished warrior; who knows if after the death of Prince Yeremi he is not the greatest in the Commonwealth? He was defeated in the last battle, it is true; but against eighteen thousand he had six thousand men. The treasurer and the <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i> of Vityebsk blame him terribly for this, saying that with small forces he rushed against such a disproportionate power to avoid sharing victory with them. God knows how it was! But he stood up manfully and did not spare his own life. And I who saw it all, say only this, that if we had had troops and money enough, not a foot of the enemy would have left the country. So I think that he will begin at the Swedes more sharply, and will not wait for them here, but march on Livonia.”</p>
			<p>“Why do you think that?”</p>
			<p>“For two reasons⁠—first, because he will wish to improve his reputation, shattered a little after the battle of Tsybihova; and second, because he loves war.”</p>
			<p>“That is true,” said Zagloba. “I know him, for we were at school together and I worked out his tasks for him. He was always in love with war, and therefore liked to keep company with me rather than others, for I too preferred a horse and a lance to Latin.”</p>
			<p>“It is certain that he is not like the <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i> of Poznan; he is surely a different kind of man altogether,” said Pan Stanislav.</p>
			<p>Volodyovski inquired about everything that had taken place at Uistsie, and tore his hair as he listened to the story. At last, when Pan Stanislav had finished, he said⁠—</p>
			<p>“You are right! Our Radzivill is incapable of such deeds. He is as proud as the devil, and it seems to him that in the whole world there is not a greater family than the Radzivills. He will not endure opposition, that is true; and at the treasurer, Pan Gosyevski, an honest man, he is angry because the latter will not dance when Radzivill plays. He is displeased also with his Grace the king, because he did not give him the grand baton of Lithuania soon enough. All true, as well as this⁠—that he prefers to live in the dishonorable error of Calvinism rather than turn to the true faith, that he persecutes Catholics where he can, that he founds societies of heretics. But as recompense for this, I will swear that he would rather shed the last drop of his proud blood than sign a surrender like that at Uistsie. We shall have war to wade in; for not a scribe, but a warrior, will lead us.”</p>
			<p>“That’s my play,” said Zagloba, “I want nothing more. Pan Opalinski is a scribe, and he showed soon what he was good for. They are the meanest of men! Let but one of them pull a quill out of a goose’s tail and he thinks straightway that he has swallowed all wisdom. He will say to others, ‘Son of a such kind,’ and when it comes to the sabre you cannot find him. When I was young myself, I put rhymes together to captivate the hearts of fair heads, and I might have made a goat’s horn of Pan Kohanovski with his silly verses, but later on the soldier nature got the upper hand.”</p>
			<p>“I will add, too,” continued Volodyovski, “that the nobles will soon move hither. A crowd of people will come, if only money is not lacking, for that is most important.”</p>
			<p>“In God’s name I want no general militia!” shouted Pan Stanislav. “Yan and Pan Zagloba know my sentiments already, and to you I say now that I would rather be a camp-servant in a regular squadron than hetman over the entire general militia.”</p>
			<p>“The people here are brave,” answered Volodyovski, “and very skilful. I have an example from my own levy. I could not receive all who came, and among those whom I accepted there is not a man who has not served before. I will show you this squadron, gentlemen, and if you had not learned from me you would not know that they are not old soldiers. Everyone is tempered and hammered in fire, like an old horseshoe, and stands in order like a Roman legionary. It will not be so easy for the Swedes with them, as with the men of Great Poland at Uistsie.”</p>
			<p>“I have hope that God will change everything,” said Pan Yan. “They say that the Swedes are good soldiers, but still they have never been able to stand before our regular troops. We have beaten them always⁠—that is a matter of trial; we have beaten them even when they were led by the greatest warrior they have ever had.”</p>
			<p>“In truth I am very curious to know what they can do,” answered Volodyovski; “and were it not that two other wars are now weighing on the country, I should not be angry a whit about the Swedes. We have tried the Turks, the Tartars, the Cossacks, and God knows whom we have not tried; it is well now to try the Swedes. The only trouble in the kingdom is that all the troops are occupied with the hetmans in the Ukraine. But I see already what will happen here. Prince Radzivill will leave the existing war to the treasurer and full hetman Pan Gosyevski, and will go himself at the Swedes in earnest. It will be heavy work, it is true. But we have hope that God will assist us.”</p>
			<p>“Let us go, then, without delay to Kyedani,” said Pan Stanislav.</p>
			<p>“I received an order to have the squadron ready and to appear in Kyedani myself in three days,” answered Pan Michael. “But I must show you, gentlemen this last order, for it is clear from it that the prince is thinking of the Swedes.”</p>
			<p>When he had said this, Volodyovski unlocked a box standing on a bench under the window, took out a paper folded once, and opening it began to read:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<header role="presentation">
					<p epub:type="z3998:recipient">Colonel Volodyovski:</p>
				</header>
				<p><b epub:type="z3998:salutation">Gracious Sir</b>⁠—We have read with great delight your report that the squadron is ready and can move to the campaign at any moment. Keep it ready and alert, for such difficult times are coming as have not been yet; therefore come yourself as quickly as possible to Kyedani, where we shall await you with impatience. If any reports come to you, believe them not till you have heard everything from our lips. We act as God himself and our conscience command, without reference to what malice and the ill will of man may invent against us. But at the same time we console ourselves with this⁠—that times are coming in which it will be shown definitely who is a true and real friend of the house of Radzivill and who even <i xml:lang="la">in rebus adversis</i> is willing to serve it. Kmita, Nyevyarovski, and Stankyevich have brought their squadrons here already; let yours remain in Upita, for it may be needed there, and it may have to march to Podlyasye under command of my cousin Prince Boguslav, who has considerable bodies of our troops under his command there. Of all this you will learn in detail from our lips; meanwhile we confide to your loyalty the careful execution of orders, and await you in Kyedani.</p>
				<footer role="presentation" epub:type="z3998:sender">
					<p epub:type="z3998:signature">Yanush Radzivill,</p>
					<p>Prince in Birji and Dubinki, <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i> of Vilna, grand hetman of Lithuania.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<p>“Yes, a new war is evident from this letter,” said Zagloba.</p>
			<p>“And the prince’s statement that he will act as God commands him, means that he will fight the Swedes,” added Stanislav.</p>
			<p>“Still it is a wonder to me,” said Pan Yan, “that he writes about loyalty to the house of Radzivill, and not to the country, which means more than the Radzivills, and demands prompter rescue.”</p>
			<p>“That is their lordly manner,” answered Volodyovski; “though that did not please me either at first, for I too serve the country and not the Radzivills.”</p>
			<p>“When did you receive this letter?” asked Pan Yan.</p>
			<p>“This morning, and I wanted to start this afternoon. You will rest tonight after the journey; tomorrow I shall surely return, and then we will move with the squadron wherever they command.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps to Podlyasye?” said Zagloba.</p>
			<p>“To Prince Boguslav,” added Pan Stanislav.</p>
			<p>“Prince Boguslav is now in Kyedani,” said Volodyovski. “He is a strange person, and do you look at him carefully. He is a great warrior and a still greater knight, but he is not a Pole to the value of a copper. He wears a foreign dress, and talks German or French altogether; you might think he was cracking nuts, might listen to him a whole hour, and not understand a thing.”</p>
			<p>“Prince Boguslav at Berestechko bore himself well,” said Zagloba, “and brought a good number of German infantry.”</p>
			<p>“Those who know him more intimately do not praise him very highly,” continued Volodyovski, “for he loves only the Germans and French. It cannot be otherwise, since he was born of a German mother, the daughter of the elector of Brandenburg, with whom his late father not only received no dowry, but, since those small princes (the electors) as may be seen have poor housekeeping, he had to pay something. But with the Radzivills it is important to have a vote in the German Empire, of which they are princes, and therefore they make alliances with the Germans. Pan Sakovich, an old client of Prince Boguslav, who made him starosta of Oshmiani, told me about this. He and Pan Nyevyarovski, a colonel, were abroad with Prince Boguslav in various foreign lands, and acted always as seconds in his duels.”</p>
			<p>“How many has he fought?” asked Zagloba.</p>
			<p>“As many as he has hairs on his head! He cut up various princes greatly and foreign counts, French and German, for they say that he is very fiery, brave, and daring, and calls a man out for the least word.”</p>
			<p>Pan Stanislav was roused from his thoughtfulness and said: “I too have heard of this Prince Boguslav, for it is not far from us to the elector, with whom he lives continually. I have still in mind how my father said that when Prince Boguslav’s father married the elector’s daughter, people complained that such a great house as that of the Radzivills made an alliance with strangers. But perhaps it happened for the best; the elector as a relative of the Radzivills ought to be very friendly now to the Commonwealth, and on him much depends at present. What you say about their poor housekeeping is not true. It is certain, however, that if anyone were to sell all the possessions of the Radzivills, he could buy with the price of them the elector and his whole principality; but the present <i xml:lang="de">kurfürst</i>, Friedrich Wilhelm, has saved no small amount of money, and has twenty thousand very good troops with whom he might boldly meet the Swedes⁠—which as a vassal of the Commonwealth he ought to do if he has God in his heart, and remembers all the kindness which the Commonwealth has shown his house.”</p>
			<p>“Will he do that?” asked Pan Yan.</p>
			<p>“It would be black ingratitude and faith-breaking on his part if he did otherwise,” answered Pan Stanislav.</p>
			<p>“It is hard to count on the gratitude of strangers, and especially of heretics,” said Zagloba. “I remember this <i xml:lang="de">kurfürst</i> of yours when he was still a stripling. He was always sullen; one would have said that he was listening to what the devil was whispering in his ear. When I was in Prussia with the late Konyetspolski, I told the <i xml:lang="de">kurfürst</i> that to his eyes⁠—for he is a Lutheran, the same as the King of Sweden. God grant that they make no alliance against the Commonwealth!”</p>
			<p>“Do you know, Michael,” said Pan Yan, suddenly, “I will not rest here; I will go with you to Kyedani. It is better at this season to travel in the night, for it is hot in the daytime, and I am eager to escape from uncertainty. There is resting-time ahead, for surely the prince will not march tomorrow.”</p>
			<p>“Especially as he has given orders to keep the squadron in Upita,” answered Pan Michael.</p>
			<p>“You speak well!” cried Zagloba; “I will go too.”</p>
			<p>“Then we will all go together,” said Pan Stanislav.</p>
			<p>“We shall be in Kyedani in the morning,” said Pan Michael, “and on the road we can sleep sweetly in our saddles.”</p>
			<p>Two hours later, after they had eaten and drunk somewhat, the knights started on their journey, and before sundown reached Krakin.</p>
			<p>On the road Pan Michael told them about the neighborhood, and the famous nobles of Lauda, of Kmita, and of all that had happened during a certain time. He confessed also his love for Panna Billevich, unrequited as usual.</p>
			<p>“It is well that war is near,” said he, “otherwise I should have suffered greatly, when I think at times that such is my misfortune, and that probably I shall die in the single state.”</p>
			<p>“No harm will come to you from that,” said Zagloba, “for it is an honorable state and pleasing to God. I have resolved to remain in it to the end of my life. Sometimes I regret that there will be no one to leave my fame and name to; for though I love Yan’s children as if they were my own, still the Skshetuskis are not the Zaglobas.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, evil man! You have made this choice with a feeling like that of the wolf when he vowed not to kill sheep after all his teeth were gone.”</p>
			<p>“But that is not true,” said Zagloba. “It is not so long, Michael, since you and I were in Warsaw at the election. At whom were all the women looking if not at me? Do you not remember how you used to complain that not one of them was looking at you? But if you have such a desire for the married state, then be not troubled; your turn will come too. This seeking is of no use; you will find just when you are not seeking. This is a time of war, and many good cavaliers perish every year. Only let this Swedish war continue, the girls will be alone, and we shall find them in market by the dozen.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps I shall perish too,” said Pan Michael. “I have had enough of this battering through the world. Never shall I be able to tell you, gentlemen, what a worthy and beautiful lady Panna Billevich is. And if it were a man who had loved and petted her in the tenderest way⁠—No! the devils had to bring this Kmita. It must be that he gave her something, it cannot be otherwise; for if he had not, surely she would not have let me go. There, look! Just beyond the hills Vodokty is visible; but there is no one in the house. She has gone God knows whither. The bear has his den, the pig his nest, but I have only this crowbait and this saddle on which I sit.”</p>
			<p>“I see that she has pierced you like a thorn,” said Zagloba.</p>
			<p>“True, so that when I think of myself or when riding by I see Vodokty, I grieve still. I wanted to strike out the wedge with a wedge,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-18" id="noteref-18" epub:type="noteref">18</a> and went to Pan Schilling, who has a very comely daughter. Once I saw her on the road at a distance, and she took my fancy greatly. I went to his house, and what shall I say, gentlemen? I did not find the father at home, but the daughter Panna Kahna thought that I was not Pan Volodyovski, but only Pan Volodyovski’s attendant. I took the affront so to heart that I have never shown myself there again.”</p>
			<p>Zagloba began to laugh. “God help you, Michael! The whole matter is this⁠—you must find a wife of such stature as you are yourself. But where did that little rogue go to who was in attendance on Princess Vishnyevetski, and whom the late Pan Podbipienta⁠—God light his soul!⁠—was to marry? She was just your size, a regular peach-stone, though her eyes did shine terribly.”</p>
			<p>“That was Anusia Borzabogati,” said Pan Yan. “We were all in love with her in our time⁠—Michael too. God knows where she is now!”</p>
			<p>“I might seek her out and comfort her,” said Pan Michael. “When you mention her it grows warm around my heart. She was a most respectable girl. Ah, those old days of Lubni were pleasant, but never will they return. They will not, for never will there be such a chief as our Prince Yeremi. A man knew that every battle would be followed by victory. Radzivill was a great warrior, but not such, and men do not serve him with such heart, for he has not that fatherly love for soldiers, and does not admit them to confidence, having something about him of the monarch, though the Vishnyevetskis were not inferior to the Radzivills.”</p>
			<p>“No matter,” said Pan Yan. “The salvation of the country is in his hands now, and because he is ready to give his life for it, God bless him!”</p>
			<p>Thus conversed the old friends, riding along in the night. They called up old questions at one time; at another they spoke of the grievous days of the present, in which three wars at once had rolled on the Commonwealth. Later they repeated “Our Father” and the litany; and when they had finished, sleep wearied them, and they began to doze and nod on the saddles.</p>
			<p>The night was clear and warm; the stars twinkled by thousands in the sky. Dragging on at a walk, they slept sweetly till, when day began to break. Pan Michael woke.</p>
			<p>“Gentlemen, open your eyes; Kyedani is in sight!” cried he.</p>
			<p>“What, where?” asked Zagloba. “Kyedani, where?”</p>
			<p>“Off there! The towers are visible.”</p>
			<p>“A respectable sort of place,” said Pan Stanislav.</p>
			<p>“Very considerable,” answered Volodyovski; “and of this you will be able to convince yourselves better in the daytime.”</p>
			<p>“But is this the inheritance of the prince?”</p>
			<p>“Yes. Formerly it belonged to the Kishkis, from whom the father of the present prince received it as dowry with Panna Anna Kishki, daughter of the <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i> of Vityebsk. In all Jmud there is not such a well-ordered place, for the Radzivills do not admit Jews, save by permission to each one. The meads here are celebrated.”</p>
			<p>Zagloba opened his eyes.</p>
			<p>“But do people of some politeness live here? What is that immensely great building on the eminence?”</p>
			<p>“That is the castle just built during the rule of Yanush.”</p>
			<p>“Is it fortified?”</p>
			<p>“No, but it is a lordly residence. It is not fortified, for no enemy has ever entered these regions since the time of the Knights of the Cross. That pointed steeple in the middle of the town belongs to the parish church built by the Knights of the Cross in pagan times; later it was given to the Calvinists, but the priest Kobylinski won it back for the Catholics through a lawsuit with Prince Krishtof.”</p>
			<p>“Praise be to God for that!”</p>
			<p>Thus conversing they arrived near the first cottages of the suburbs. Meanwhile it grew brighter and brighter in the world, and the sun began to rise. The knights looked with curiosity at the new place, and Pan Volodyovski continued to speak⁠—</p>
			<p>“This is Jew street, in which dwell those of the Jews who have permission to be here. Following this street, one comes to the market. Oho! people are up already, and beginning to come out of the houses. See, a crowd of horses before the forges, and attendants not in the Radzivill colors! There must be some meeting in Kyedani. It is always full of nobles and high personages here, and sometimes they come from foreign countries, for this is the capital for heretics from all Jmud, who under the protection of the Radzivills carry on their sorcery and superstitious practices. That is the market-square. See what a clock is on the town-house! There is no better one to this day in Dantzig. And that which looks like a church with four towers is a Helvetic (Calvinistic) meetinghouse, in which every Sunday they blaspheme God; and farther on the Lutheran church. You think that the townspeople are Poles or Lithuanians⁠—not at all. Real Germans and Scots, but more Scots. The Scots are splendid infantry, and cut terribly with battle-axes. The prince has also one Scottish regiment of volunteers of Kyedani. <i>Ei</i>, how many wagons with packs on the market-square! Surely there is some meeting. There are no inns in the town; acquaintances stop with acquaintances, and nobles go to the castle, in which there are rooms tens of ells long, intended for guests only. There they entertain, at the prince’s expense, everyone honorably, even if for a year; there are people who stay there all their lives.”</p>
			<p>“It is a wonder to me that lightning has not burned that Calvinistic meetinghouse,” said Zagloba.</p>
			<p>“But do you not know that that has happened? In the centre between the four towers was a cap-shaped cupola; on a time such a lightning-flash struck this cupola that nothing remained of it. In the vault underneath lies the father of Prince Boguslav, Yanush⁠—he who joined the mutiny against Sigismund <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. His own haiduk laid open his skull, so that he died in vain, as he had lived in sin.”</p>
			<p>“But what is that broad building which looks like a walled tent?” asked Pan Yan.</p>
			<p>“That is the paper-mill founded by the prince; and at the side of it is a printing-office, in which heretical books are printed.”</p>
			<p>“<i>Tfu!</i>” said Zagloba; “a pestilence on this place, where a man draws no air into his stomach but what is heretical! Lucifer might rule here as well as Radzivill.”</p>
			<p>“Gracious sir,” answered Volodyovski, “abuse not Radzivill, for perhaps the country will soon owe its salvation to him.”</p>
			<p>They rode farther in silence, gazing at the town and wondering at its good order; for the streets were all paved with stone, which was at that period a novelty.</p>
			<p>After they had ridden through the market-square and the street of the castle, they saw on an eminence the lordly residence recently built by Prince Yanush⁠—not fortified, it is true, but surpassing in size not only palaces but castles. The great pile was on a height, and looked on the town lying, as it were, at its feet. From both sides of the main building extended at right angles two lower wings, which formed a gigantic courtyard, closed in front with an iron railing fastened with long links. In the middle of the railing towered a strong walled gate; on it the arms of the Radzivills and the arms of the town of Kyedani, representing an eagle’s foot with a black wing on a golden field, and at the foot a horseshoe with three red crosses. In front of the gate were sentries and Scottish soldiers keeping guard for show, not for defence.</p>
			<p>The hour was early, but there was movement already in the yard; for before the main building a regiment of dragoons in blue jackets and Swedish helmets was exercising. Just then the long line of men was motionless, with drawn rapiers; an officer riding in front said something to the soldiers. Around the line and farther on near the walls, a number of attendants in various colors gazed at the dragoons, making remarks and giving opinions to one another.</p>
			<p>“As God is dear to me,” said Pan Michael, “that is Kharlamp drilling the regiment!”</p>
			<p>“How!” cried Zagloba; “is he the same with whom you were going to fight a duel at Lipkovo?”</p>
			<p>“The very same; but since that time we have lived in close friendship.”</p>
			<p>“ ’Tis he,” said Zagloba; “I know him by his nose, which sticks out from under his helmet. It is well that visors have gone out of fashion, for that knight could not close any visor; he would need a special invention for his nose.”</p>
			<p>That moment Pan Kharlamp, seeing Volodyovski, came to him at a trot. “How are you, Michael?” cried he. “It is well that you have come.”</p>
			<p>“It is better that I meet you first. See, here is Pan Zagloba, whom you met in Lipkovo⁠—no, before that in Syennitsy; and these are the Skshetuskis⁠—Yan, captain of the king’s hussars, the hero of Zbaraj⁠—”</p>
			<p>“I see, then, as God is true, the greatest knight in Poland!” cried Kharlamp. “With the forehead, with the forehead!”</p>
			<p>“And this is Stanislav Skshetuski, captain of Kalisk, who comes straight from Uistsie.”</p>
			<p>“From Uistsie? So you saw a terrible disgrace. We know already what has happened.”</p>
			<p>“It is just because such a thing happened that I have come, hoping that nothing like it will happen in this place.”</p>
			<p>“You may be certain of that; Radzivill is not Opalinski.”</p>
			<p>“We said the same at Upita yesterday.”</p>
			<p>“I greet you, gentlemen, most joyfully in my own name and that of the prince. The prince will be glad to see such knights, for he needs them much. Come with me to the barracks, where my quarters are. You will need, of course, to change clothes and eat breakfast. I will go with you, for I have finished the drill.”</p>
			<p>Pan Kharlamp hurried again to the line, and commanded in a quick, clear voice: “To the left! face⁠—to the rear!”</p>
			<p>Hoofs sounded on the pavement. The line broke into two; the halves broke again till there were four parts, which began to recede with slow step in the direction of the barracks.</p>
			<p>“Good soldiers,” said Skshetuski, looking with skilled eye at the regular movements of the dragoons.</p>
			<p>“Those are petty nobles and attendant boyars who serve in that arm,” answered Volodyovski.</p>
			<p>“Oh, you could tell in a moment that they are not militia,” cried Pan Stanislav.</p>
			<p>“But does Kharlamp command them,” asked Zagloba, “or am I mistaken? I remember that he served in the light-horse squadron and wore silver loops.”</p>
			<p>“True,” answered Volodyovski; “but it is a couple of years since he took the dragoon regiment. He is an old soldier, and trained.”</p>
			<p>Meanwhile Kharlamp, having dismissed the dragoons, returned to the knights. “I beg you, gentlemen, to follow me. Over there are the barracks, beyond the castle.”</p>
			<p>Half an hour later the five were sitting over a bowl of heated beer, well whitened with cream, and were talking about the impending war.</p>
			<p>“And what is to be heard here?” asked Pan Michael.</p>
			<p>“With us something new may be heard every day, for people are lost in surmises and give out new reports all the time,” said Kharlamp. “But in truth the prince alone knows what is coming. He has something on his mind, for though he simulates gladness and is kind to people as never before, he is terribly thoughtful. In the night, they say, he does not sleep, but walks with heavy tread through all the chambers, talking audibly to himself, and in the daytime takes counsel for whole hours with Harasimovich.”</p>
			<p>“Who is Harasimovich?” asked Volodyovski.</p>
			<p>“The manager from Zabludovo in Podlyasye⁠—a man of small stature, who looks as though he kept the devil under his arm; but he is a confidential agent of the prince, and probably knows all his secrets. According to my thinking, from these counsellings a terrible and vengeful war with Sweden will come, for which war we are all sighing. Meanwhile letters are flying hither from the Prince of Courland, from Hovanski, and from the Elector of Brandenburg. Some say that the prince is negotiating with Moscow to join the league against Sweden; others say the contrary; but it seems there will be a league with no one, but a war, as I have said, with these and those. Fresh troops are coming continually; letters are sent to nobles most faithful to the Radzivills, asking them to assemble. Every place is full of armed men. <i>Ei</i>, gentlemen, on whomsoever they put the grain, on him will it be ground; but we shall have our hands red to the elbows, for when Radzivill moves to the field, he will not negotiate.”</p>
			<p>“That’s it, that’s it!” said Zagloba, rubbing his palms. “No small amount of Swedish blood has dried on my hands, and there will be more of it in future. Not many of those old soldiers are alive yet who remember me at Putsk and Tjtsianna; but those who are living will never forget me.”</p>
			<p>“Is Prince Boguslav here?” asked Volodyovski.</p>
			<p>“Of course. Besides him we expect today some great guests, for the upper chambers are made ready, and there is to be a banquet in the evening. I have my doubts, Michael, whether you will reach the prince today.”</p>
			<p>“He sent for me himself yesterday.”</p>
			<p>“That’s nothing; he is terribly occupied. Besides, I don’t know whether I can speak of it to you⁠—but in an hour everybody will know of it, therefore I will tell you⁠—something or another very strange is going on.”</p>
			<p>“What is it, what is it?” asked Zagloba.</p>
			<p>“It must be known to you, gentlemen, that two days ago Pan Yudytski came, a knight of Malta, of whom you must have heard.”</p>
			<p>“Of course,” said Yan; “he is a great knight.”</p>
			<p>“Immediately after him came the full hetman and treasurer. We were greatly astonished, for it is known in what rivalry and enmity Pan Gosyevski is with our prince. Some persons were rejoiced therefore that harmony had come between the lords, and said that the Swedish invasion was the real cause of this. I thought so myself; then yesterday the three shut themselves up in counsel, fastened all the doors, no one could hear what they were talking about; but Pan Krepshtul, who guarded the door, told us that their talk was terribly loud, especially the talk of Pan Gosyevski. Later the prince himself conducted them to their sleeping-chambers, and in the night⁠—imagine to yourselves” (here Kharlamp lowered his voice)⁠—“guards were placed at the door of each chamber.”</p>
			<p>Volodyovski sprang up from his seat. “In God’s name! impossible!”</p>
			<p>“But it is true. At the doors of each Scots are standing with muskets, and they have the order to let no one in or out under pain of death.”</p>
			<p>The knights looked at one another with astonishment; and Kharlamp was no less astonished at his own words, and looked at his companions with staring eyes, as if awaiting the explanation of the riddle from them.</p>
			<p>“Does this mean that Pan Gosyevski is arrested? Has the grand hetman arrested the full hetman?” asked Zagloba; “what does this mean?”</p>
			<p>“As if I know, and Yudytski such a knight!”</p>
			<p>“But the officers of the prince must speak with one another about it and guess at causes. Have you heard nothing?”</p>
			<p>“I asked Harasimovich last night.”</p>
			<p>“What did he say?” asked Zagloba.</p>
			<p>“He would explain nothing, but he put his finger on his mouth and said, ‘They are traitors!’ ”</p>
			<p>“How traitors?” cried Volodyovski, seizing his head. “Neither the treasurer nor Pan Yudytski is a traitor. The whole Commonwealth knows them as honorable men and patriots.”</p>
			<p>“At present ’tis impossible to have faith in any man,” answered Pan Stanislav, gloomily. “Did not Pan Opalinski pass for a Cato? Did he not reproach others with defects, with offences, with selfishness? But when it came to do something, he was the first to betray, and brought not only himself, but a whole province to treason.”</p>
			<p>“I will give my head for the treasurer and Pan Yudytski!” cried Volodyovski.</p>
			<p>“Do not give your head for any man, Michael dear,” said Zagloba. “They were not arrested without reason. There must have been some conspiracy; it cannot be otherwise⁠—how could it be? The prince is preparing for a terrible war, and every aid is precious to him. Whom, then, at such a time can he put under arrest, if not those who stand in the way of war? If this is so, if these two men have really stood in the way, then praise be to God that Radzivill has anticipated them. They deserve to sit under ground. Ah, the scoundrels!⁠—at such a time to practise tricks, communicate with the enemy, rise against the country, hinder a great warrior in his undertaking! By the Most Holy Mother, what has met them is too little, the rascals!”</p>
			<p>“These are wonders⁠—such wonders that I cannot put them in my head,” said Kharlamp; “for letting alone that they are such dignitaries, they are arrested without judgment, without a diet, without the will of the whole Commonwealth⁠—a thing which the king himself has not the right to do.”</p>
			<p>“As true as I live,” cried Pan Michael.</p>
			<p>“It is evident that the prince wants to introduce Roman customs among us,” said Pan Stanislav, “and become dictator in time of war.”</p>
			<p>“Let him be dictator if he will only beat the Swedes,” said Zagloba; “I will be the first to vote for his dictatorship.”</p>
			<p>Pan Yan fell to thinking, and after a while said, “Unless he should wish to become protector, like that English Cromwell who did not hesitate to raise his sacrilegious hand on his own king.”</p>
			<p>“Nonsense! Cromwell? Cromwell was a heretic!” cried Zagloba.</p>
			<p>“But what is the prince <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i>?” asked Pan Yan, seriously.</p>
			<p>At this question all were silent, and considered the dark future for a time with fear; but Kharlamp looked angry and said⁠—</p>
			<p>“I have served under the prince from early years, though I am little younger than he; for in the beginning, when I was still a stripling, he was my captain, later on he was full hetman, and now he is grand hetman. I know him better than anyone here; I both love and honor him; therefore I ask you not to compare him with Cromwell, so that I may not be forced to say something which would not become me as host in this room.”</p>
			<p>Here Kharlamp began to twitch his mustaches terribly, and to frown a little at Pan Yan; seeing which, Volodyovski fixed on Kharlamp a cool and sharp look, as if he wished to say, “Only growl, only growl!”</p>
			<p>Great Mustache took note at once, for he held Volodyovski in unusual esteem, and besides it was dangerous to get angry with him; therefore he continued in a far milder tone⁠—</p>
			<p>“The prince is a Calvinist; but he did not reject the true faith for errors, for he was born in them. He will never become either a Cromwell, a Radzeyovski, or an Opalinski, though Kyedani had to sink through the earth. Not such is his blood, not such his stock.”</p>
			<p>“If he is the devil and has horns on his head,” said Zagloba, “so much the better, for he will have something to gore the Swedes with.”</p>
			<p>“But that Pan Gosyevski and Pan Yudytski are arrested, well, well!” said Volodyovski, shaking his head. “The prince is not very amiable to guests who have confided in him.”</p>
			<p>“What do you say, Michael?” answered Kharlamp. “He is amiable as he has never been in his life. He is now a real father to the knights. Think how some time ago he had always a frown on his forehead, and on his lips one word, ‘Service.’ A man was more afraid to go near his majesty than he was to stand before the king; and now he goes every day among the lieutenants and the officers, converses, asks each one about his family, his children, his property, calls each man by name, and inquires if injustice has been done to anyone in service. He who among the highest lords will not own an equal, walked yesterday arm-in-arm with young Kmita. We could not believe our eyes; for though the family of Kmita is a great one, he is quite young, and likely many accusations are weighing on him. Of this you know best.”</p>
			<p>“I know, I know,” replied Volodyovski. “Has Kmita been here long?”</p>
			<p>“He is not here now, for he went yesterday to Cheykishki for a regiment of infantry stationed there. No one is now in such favor with the prince as Kmita. When he was going away the prince looked after him awhile and said, ‘That man is equal to anything, and is ready to seize the devil himself by the tail if I tell him!’ We heard this with our own ears. It is true that Kmita brought a squadron that has not an equal in the whole army⁠—men and horses like dragons!”</p>
			<p>“There is no use in talking, he is a valiant soldier, and in truth ready for everything,” said Pan Michael. “He performed wonders in the last campaign, till a price was set on his head, for he led volunteers and carried on war himself.”</p>
			<p>Further conversation was interrupted by the entrance of a new figure. This was a noble about forty years of age, small, dry, alert, wriggling like a mudfish, with a small face, very thin lips, a scant mustache, and very crooked eyes. He was dressed in a ticking-coat, with such long sleeves that they covered his hands completely. When he had entered he bent double, then he straightened himself as suddenly as if moved by a spring, again he inclined with a low bow, turned his head as if he were taking it out of his own armpits, and began to speak hurriedly in a voice which recalled the squeaking of a rusty weathercock⁠—</p>
			<p>“With the forehead, Pan Kharlamp, with the forehead. Ah! with the forehead, Pan Colonel, most abject servant!”</p>
			<p>“With the forehead, Pan Harasimovich,” answered Kharlamp; “and what is your wish?”</p>
			<p>“God gave guests, distinguished guests. I came to offer my services and to inquire their rank.”</p>
			<p>“Did they come to you, Pan Harasimovich?”</p>
			<p>“Certainly not to me, for I am not worthy of that; but because I take the place of the absent marshal. I have come to greet them profoundly.”</p>
			<p>“It is far from you to the marshal,” said Kharlamp; “for he is a personage with inherited land, while you with permission are under-starosta of Zabludovo.”</p>
			<p>“A servant of the servants of Radzivill. That is true, Pan Kharlamp, I make no denial; God preserve me therefrom. But since the prince has heard of the guests, he has sent me to inquire who they are; therefore you will answer, Pan Kharlamp, if I were even a haiduk and not the under-starosta of Zabludovo.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, I would answer even a monkey if he were to come with an order,” said Big Nose. “Listen now, and calk these names into yourself if your head is not able to hold them. This is Pan Skshetuski, that hero of Zbaraj; and this is his cousin Stanislav.”</p>
			<p>“Great God! what do I hear?” cried Harasimovich.</p>
			<p>“This is Pan Zagloba.”</p>
			<p>“Great God! what do I hear?”</p>
			<p>“If you are so confused at hearing my name,” said Zagloba, “think of the confusion of the enemy in the field.”</p>
			<p>“And this is Colonel Volodyovski,” finished Kharlamp.</p>
			<p>“And he has a famous sabre, and besides is a Radzivill man,” said Harasimovich, with a bow. “The prince’s head is splitting from labor; but still he will find time for such knights, surely he will find it. Meanwhile with what can you be served? The whole castle is at the service of such welcome guests, and the cellars as well.”</p>
			<p>“We have heard of the famous meads of Kyedani,” said Zagloba, hurriedly.</p>
			<p>“Indeed!” answered Harasimovich, “there are glorious meads in Kyedani, glorious. I will send some hither for you to choose from right away. I hope that my benefactors will stay here long.”</p>
			<p>“We have come hither,” said Pan Stanislav, “not to leave the side of the prince.”</p>
			<p>“Praiseworthy is your intention, the more so that trying times are at hand.”</p>
			<p>When he had said this, Harasimovich wriggled and became as small as if an ell had been taken from his stature.</p>
			<p>“What is to be heard?” asked Kharlamp. “Is there any news?”</p>
			<p>“The prince has not closed an eye all night, for two envoys have come. Evil are the tidings, increasingly evil. Karl Gustav has already entered the Commonwealth after Wittemberg; Poznan is now occupied, all Great Poland is occupied, Mazovia will be occupied soon; the Swedes are in Lovich, right at Warsaw. Our king has fled from Warsaw, which he left undefended. Today or tomorrow the Swedes will enter. They say that the king has lost a considerable battle, that he thinks of escaping to Krakow, and thence to foreign lands to ask aid. Evil, gracious gentlemen, my benefactors! Though there are some who say that it is well; for the Swedes commit no violence, observe agreements sacredly, collect no imposts, respect liberties, do not hinder the faith. Therefore all accept the protection of Karl Gustav willingly. For our king, Yan Kazimir, is at fault, greatly at fault. All is lost, lost for him! One would like to weep, but all is lost, lost!”</p>
			<p>“Why the devil do you wriggle like a mudfish going to the pot,” howled Zagloba, “and speak of a misfortune as if you were glad of it?”</p>
			<p>Harasimovich pretended not to hear, and raising his eyes to heaven he repeated yet a number of times: “All is lost, lost for the ages! The Commonwealth cannot stand against three wars. Lost! The will of God, the will of God! Our prince alone can save Lithuania.”</p>
			<p>The ill-omened words had not yet ceased to sound when Harasimovich vanished behind the door as quickly as if he had sunk through the earth, and the knights sat in gloom bent by the weight of terrible thoughts.</p>
			<p>“We shall go mad!” cried Volodyovski at last.</p>
			<p>“You are right,” said Stanislav. “God give war, war at the earliest⁠—war in which a man does not ruin himself in thinking, nor yield his soul to despair, but fights.”</p>
			<p>“We shall regret the first period of Hmelnitski’s war,” said Zagloba; “for though there were defeats then, there were no traitors.”</p>
			<p>“Three such terrible wars, when in fact there is a lack of forces for one,” said Stanislav.</p>
			<p>“Not a lack of forces, but of spirit. The country is perishing through viciousness. God grant us to live to something better!” said Pan Yan, gloomily.</p>
			<p>“We shall not rest till we are in the field,” said Stanislav.</p>
			<p>“If we can only see this prince soon!” cried Zagloba.</p>
			<p>Their wishes were accomplished directly; for after an hour’s time Harasimovich came again, with still lower bows, and with the announcement that the prince was waiting anxiously to see them.</p>
			<p>They sprang up at once, for they had already changed uniforms, and went. Harasimovich, in conducting them from the barracks, passed through the courtyard, which was full of soldiers and nobles. In some places they were conversing in crowds, evidently over the same news which the under-starosta of Zabludovo had brought the knights. On all faces were depicted lively alarm and a certain feverish expectation. Isolated groups of officers and nobles were listening to the speakers, who standing in the midst of them gesticulated violently. On the way were heard the words: “Vilna is burning, Vilna is burned!⁠—No trace of it, nor the ashes! Warsaw is taken!⁠—Untrue, not taken yet!⁠—The Swedes are in Little Poland! The people of Syeradz will resist!⁠—They will not resist, they will follow the example of Great Poland!⁠—Treason! misfortune! O God, God! It is unknown where to put sabre or hand!”</p>
			<p>Such words as these, more and more terrible, struck the ears of the knights; but they went on pushing after Harasimovich through the soldiers and nobles with difficulty. In places acquaintances greeted Volodyovski: “How is your health, Michael? ’Tis evil with us; we are perishing! With the forehead, brave Colonel! And what guests are these whom you are taking to the prince?” Pan Michael answered not, wishing to escape delay; and in this fashion they went to the main body of the castle, in which the janissaries of the prince, in chain-mail and gigantic white caps, were on guard.</p>
			<p>In the antechamber and on the main staircase, set around with orange-trees, the throng was still greater than in the courtyard. They were discussing there the arrest of Gosyevski and Yudytski; for the affair had become known, and roused the minds of men to the utmost. They were astonished and lost in surmises, they were indignant or praised the foresight of the prince; but all hoped to hear the explanation of the riddle from Radzivill himself, therefore a river of heads was flowing along the broad staircase up to the hall of audience, in which at that time the prince was to receive colonels and the most intimate nobility. Soldiers disposed along the stone banisters to see that the throng was not too dense, repeated, from moment to moment, “Slowly, gracious gentlemen, slowly!” And the crowd pushed forward or halted for a moment, when a soldier stopped the way with a halbert so that those in front might have time to enter the hall.</p>
			<p>At last the blue vaultings of the hall gleamed before the open door, and our acquaintances entered. Their glances fell first on an elevation, placed in the depth of the hall, occupied by a brilliant retinue of knights and lords in rich, many-colored dresses. In front stood an empty armchair, pushed forward beyond the others. This chair had a lofty back, ending with the gilded coronet of the prince, from beneath which flowed downward orange-colored velvet trimmed with ermine.</p>
			<p>The prince was not in the hall yet; but Harasimovich, conducting the knights without interruption, pushed through the nobility till he reached a small door concealed in the wall at the side of the elevation. There he directed them to remain, and disappeared through the door.</p>
			<p>After a while he returned with the announcement that the prince asked them to enter.</p>
			<p>The two Skshetuskis, with Zagloba and Volodyovski, entered a small but very well-lighted room, having walls covered with leather stamped in flowers, which were gilded. The officers halted on seeing in the depth of the room, at a table covered with papers, two men conversing intently. One of them, still young, dressed in foreign fashion, wearing a wig with long locks falling to his shoulders, whispered something in the ear of his elder companion; the latter heard him with frowning brow, and nodded from time to time. So much was he occupied with the subject of the conversation that he did not turn attention at once to those who had entered.</p>
			<p>He was a man somewhat beyond forty years, of gigantic stature and great shoulders. He wore a scarlet Polish coat, fastened at the neck with costly brooches. He had an enormous face, with features expressing pride, importance, and power. It was at once the face of an angry lion, of a warrior, and a ruler. Long pendent mustaches lent it a stern expression, and altogether in its strength and size it was as if struck out of marble with great blows of a hammer. The brows were at that moment frowning from intense thought; but it could easily be seen that when they were frowning from anger, woe to those men and those armies on whom the thunders of that anger should fall.</p>
			<p>There was something so great in the form that it seemed to those knights that not only the room, but the whole castle was too narrow for it; in fact, their first impression had not deceived them, for sitting in their presence was Yanush Radzivill, prince at Birji and Dubinki, <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i> of Vilna and grand hetman of Lithuania⁠—a man so powerful and proud that in all his immense estates, in all his dignities, nay, in Jmud and in Lithuania itself, it was too narrow for him.</p>
			<p>The younger man in the long wig and foreign dress was Prince Boguslav, the cousin of Yanush. After a while he whispered something more in the ear of the hetman, and at last said audibly⁠—</p>
			<p>“I will leave, then, my signature on the document and go.”</p>
			<p>“Since it cannot be otherwise, go,” said Yanush, “though I would that you remained, for it is unknown what may happen.”</p>
			<p>“You have planned everything properly; henceforth it is needful to look carefully to the cause, and now I commit you to God.”</p>
			<p>“May the Lord have in care our whole house and bring it praise.”</p>
			<p>“Adieu, <i xml:lang="fr">mon frère</i>.”</p>
			<p>“Adieu.”</p>
			<p>The two princes shook hands; then Boguslav went out hurriedly, and the grand hetman turned to the visitors.</p>
			<p>“Pardon me, gentlemen, that I let you wait,” said he, with a low, deliberate voice; “but now time and attention are snatched from us on every side. I have heard your names, and rejoice in my soul that God sent me such knights in this crisis. Be seated, dear guests. Who of you is Pan Yan Skshetuski?”</p>
			<p>“I am, at the service of your highness.”</p>
			<p>“Then you are a starosta⁠—pardon me, I forgot.”</p>
			<p>“I am not a starosta,” answered Yan.</p>
			<p>“How is that?” asked the prince, frowning with his two mighty brows; “they have not made you a starosta for what you did at Zbaraj?”</p>
			<p>“I have never asked for the office.”</p>
			<p>“But they should have made you starosta without the asking. How is this? What do you tell me? You rewarded with nothing, forgotten entirely? This is a wonder to me. But I am talking at random. It should astonish no man; for in these days only he is rewarded who has the back of a willow, light-bending. You are not a starosta, upon my word! Thanks be to God that you have come hither, for here we have not such short memories, and no service remains unrewarded. How is it with you, worthy Colonel Volodyovski?”</p>
			<p>“I have earned nothing yet.”</p>
			<p>“Leave that to me, and now take this document, drawn up in Rossyeni, by which I give you Dydkyemie for life. It is not a bad piece of land, and a hundred ploughs go out to work there every spring. Take even that, for I cannot give more, and tell Pan Skshetuski that Radzivill does not forget his friends, nor those who give their service to the country under his leadership.”</p>
			<p>“Your princely highness!” stammered Pan Michael, in confusion.</p>
			<p>“Say nothing, and pardon that it is so small; but tell these gentlemen that he who joins his fortune for good and ill with that of Radzivill will not perish. I am not king; but if I were, God is my witness that I would never forget such a Yan Skshetuski or such a Zagloba.”</p>
			<p>“That is I!” said Zagloba, pushing himself forward sharply, for he had begun to be impatient that there was no mention of him.</p>
			<p>“I thought it was you, for I have been told that you were a man of advanced years.”</p>
			<p>“I went to school in company with your highness’s worthy father; and there was such knightly impulse in him from childhood that he took me to his confidence, for I loved the lance before Latin.”</p>
			<p>To Pan Stanislav, who knew Zagloba less, it was strange to hear this, since only the day before, Zagloba said in Upita that he had gone to school, not with the late Prince Kryshtof, but with Yanush himself⁠—which was unlikely, for Prince Yanush was notably younger.</p>
			<p>“Indeed,” said the prince; “so then you are from Lithuania by family?”</p>
			<p>“From Lithuania!” answered Zagloba, without hesitation.</p>
			<p>“Then I know that you need no reward, for we Lithuanians are used to be fed with ingratitude. As God is true, if I should give you your deserts, gentlemen, there would be nothing left for myself. But such is fate! We give our blood, lives, fortunes, and no one nods a head to us. Ah! ’tis hard; but as they sow will they reap. That is what God and justice command. It is you who slew the famous Burlai and cut off three heads at a blow in Zbaraj?”</p>
			<p>“I slew Burlai, your highness,” answered Zagloba, “for it was said that no man could stand before him. I wished therefore to show younger warriors that manhood was not extinct in the Commonwealth. But as to cutting off the three heads, it may be that I did that in the thick of battle; but in Zbaraj someone else did it.”</p>
			<p>The prince was silent awhile, then continued: “Does not that contempt pain you, gentlemen, with which they pay you?”</p>
			<p>“What is to be done, your highness, even if it is disagreeable to a man?” said Zagloba.</p>
			<p>“Well, comfort yourselves, for that must change. I am already your debtor, since you have come here; and though I am not king, still with me it will not end with promises.”</p>
			<p>“Your princely highness,” said Pan Yan, quickly and somewhat proudly, “we have come hither not for rewards and estates, but because the enemy has invaded the country, and we wish to go with our strength to assist it under the leadership of a famous warrior. My cousin Stanislav saw at Uistsie fear, disorder, shame, treason, and finally the enemy’s triumph. Here under a great leader and a faithful defender of our country and king we will serve. Here not victories, not triumphs, but defeats and death await the enemy. This is why we have come to offer our service to your highness. We are soldiers; we want to fight, and are impatient for battle.”</p>
			<p>“If such is your desire, you will be satisfied,” answered the prince, with importance. “You will not wait long, though at first we shall march on another enemy, for the ashes of Vilna demand vengeance. Today or tomorrow we shall march in that direction, and God grant will redeem the wrongs with interest. I will not detain you longer, gentlemen; you need rest, and work is burning me. But come in the evening to the hall; maybe some proper entertainment will take place before the march, for a great number of fair heads have assembled under our protection at Kyedani before the war. Worthy Colonel Volodyovski, entertain these welcome guests as if in your own house, and remember that what is mine is yours. Pan Harasimovich, tell my brother nobles assembled in the hall, that I will not go out, for I have not the time, and this evening they will learn everything that they wish to know. Be in good health, gentlemen, and be friends of Radzivill, for that is greatly important for him now.”</p>
			<p>When he had said this, that mighty and proud lord gave his hand in turn to Zagloba, the two Skshetuskis, Volodyovski, and Kharlamp, as if to equals. His stern face grew radiant with a cordial and friendly smile, and that inaccessibleness usually surrounding him as with a dark cloud vanished completely.</p>
			<p>“That is a leader, that is a warrior!” said Stanislav, when on the return they had pushed themselves through the throng of nobles assembled in the audience-hall.</p>
			<p>“I would go into fire after him!” cried Zagloba. “Did you notice how he had all my exploits in his memory? It will be hot for the Swedes when that lion roars, and I second him. There is not another such man in the Commonwealth; and of the former men only Prince Yeremi first, and second Konyetspolski, the father, might be compared with him. That is not some mere castellan, the first of his family to sit in a senator’s chair, on which he has not yet smoothed out the wrinkles of his trousers, and still turns up his nose and calls the nobles younger brothers, and gives orders right away to paint his portrait, so that while dining he may have his senatorship before him, since he has nothing to look at behind. Pan Michael, you have come to fortune. It is evident now that if a man rubs against Radzivill he will gild at once his threadbare coat. It is easier to get promotion here, I see, than a quart of rotten pears with us. Stick your hands into the water in this place, and with closed eyes you will catch a pike. For me he is the magnate of magnates! God give you luck, Pan Michael! You are as confused as a young woman just married; but that is nothing! What is the name of your life estate? Dudkovo, or something? Heathen names in this country! Throw nuts against the wall, and you will have in the rattling the proper name of a village or noble. But names are nothing if the income is only good.”</p>
			<p>“I am terribly confused, I confess,” said Pan Michael, “because what you say about easy promotion is not true. More than once have I heard old soldiers charge the prince with avarice, but now unexpected favors are showered one after the other.”</p>
			<p>“Stick that document behind your belt⁠—do that for me⁠—and if anyone in future complains of the thanklessness of the prince, draw it out and give it to him on the nose. You will not find a better argument.”</p>
			<p>“One thing I see clearly: the prince is attracting people to his person, and is forming plans for which he needs help,” said Pan Yan.</p>
			<p>“But have you not heard of those plans?” asked Zagloba. “Has he not said that we have to go to avenge the ashes of Vilna? They complained that he had robbed Vilna, but he wants to show that he not only does not need other people’s property, but is ready to give of his own. That is a beautiful ambition, Yan, God give us more of such senators.”</p>
			<p>Conversing thus, they found themselves in the courtyard, to which every moment rode in now divisions of mounted troops, now crowds of armed nobles, and now carriages rolled in, bringing persons from the country around, with their wives and children.</p>
			<p>Seeing this, Pan Michael drew all with him to the gate to look at those entering.</p>
			<p>“Who knows, Michael, this is your fortunate day? Maybe there is a wife for you among these nobles’ daughters,” said Zagloba. “Look! see, there an open carriage is approaching, and in it something white is sitting.”</p>
			<p>“That is not a lady, but a man who may marry me to one,” answered the swift-eyed Volodyovski; for from a distance he recognized the bishop Parchevski, coming with Father Byalozor, archdeacon of Vilna.</p>
			<p>“If they are priests, how are they visiting a Calvinist?”</p>
			<p>“What is to be done? When it’s necessary for public affairs, they must be polite.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, it is crowded here! Oh, it is noisy!” cried Zagloba, with delight. “A man grows rusty in the country, like an old key in a lock; here I think of better times. I’m a rascal if I don’t make love to some pretty girl today.”</p>
			<p>Zagloba’s words were interrupted by the soldiers keeping guard at the gate, who rushing out from their booths stood in two ranks to salute the bishop; and he rode past, making the sign of the cross with his hand on each side, blessing the soldiers and the nobles assembled near by.</p>
			<p>“The prince is a polite man,” said Zagloba, “since he honors the bishop, though he does not recognize the supremacy of the Church. God grant this to be the first step toward conversion!”</p>
			<p>“Oh, nothing will come of it! Not few were the efforts of his first wife, and she accomplished nothing, only died from vexation. But why do the Scots not leave the line? It is evident that another dignitary will pass.”</p>
			<p>In fact, a whole retinue of armed soldiers appeared in the distance.</p>
			<p>“Those are Ganhoff’s dragoons⁠—I know them,” said Volodyovski; “but some carriages are in the middle!”</p>
			<p>At that moment the drums began to rattle.</p>
			<p>“Oh, it is evident that someone greater than the bishop of Jmud is there!” cried Zagloba.</p>
			<p>“Wait, they are here already.”</p>
			<p>“There are two carriages in the middle.”</p>
			<p>“True. In the first sits Pan Korf, the <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i> of Venden.”</p>
			<p>“Of course!” cried Pan Yan; “that is an acquaintance from Zbaraj.”</p>
			<p>The <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i> recognized them, and first Volodyovski, whom he had evidently seen oftener; in passing he leaned from the carriage and cried⁠—</p>
			<p>“I greet you, gentlemen, old comrades! See, I bring guests!”</p>
			<p>In the second carriage, with the arms of Prince Yanush, drawn by four white horses, sat two gentlemen of lordly mien, dressed in foreign fashion, in broad-brimmed hats, from under which the blond curls of wigs flowed to their shoulders over wide lace collars. One was very portly, wore a pointed light-blond beard, and mustaches bushy and turned up at the ends; the other was younger, dressed wholly in black. He had a less knightly form, but perhaps a higher office, for a gold chain glittered on his neck, with some order at the end. Apparently both were foreigners, for they looked with curiosity at the castle, the people, and the dresses.</p>
			<p>“What sort of devils?” asked Zagloba.</p>
			<p>“I do not know them, I have never seen them,” answered Volodyovski.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile the carriages passed, and began to turn in the yard so as to reach the main entrance of the castle, but the dragoons remained outside the gate. Volodyovski knew the officer leading them.</p>
			<p>“Tokarzevich!” called he, “come to us, please.”</p>
			<p>“With the forehead, worthy Colonel.”</p>
			<p>“And what kind of hedgehogs are you bringing?”</p>
			<p>“Those are Swedes.”</p>
			<p>“Swedes!”</p>
			<p>“Yes, and men of distinction. The portly one is Count Löwenhaupt, and the slender man is Benedikt Schitte, Baron von Duderhoff.”</p>
			<p>“Duderhoff?” asked Zagloba.</p>
			<p>“What do they want here?” inquired Volodyovski.</p>
			<p>“God knows!” answered the officer. “We escorted them from Birji. Undoubtedly they have come to negotiate with our prince, for we heard in Birji that he is assembling a great army and is going to move on Livonia.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, rascals! you are growing timid,” cried Zagloba. “Now you are invading Great Poland, now you are deposing the king, and now you are paying court to Radzivill, so that he should not tickle you in Livonia. Wait! you will run away to your Dunderhoff till your stockings are down. We’ll soon dunder with you. Long life to Radzivill!”</p>
			<p>“Long life!” repeated the nobles, standing near the gate.</p>
			<p>“Defender of the country! Our shield! Against the Swedes, worthy gentlemen, against the Swedes!”</p>
			<p>A circle was formed. Every moment nobles collected from the yard; seeing which, Zagloba sprang on the low guard-post of the gate, and began to cry⁠—</p>
			<p>“Worthy gentlemen, listen! Whoso does not know me, to him I will say that I am that defender of Zbaraj who with this old hand slew Burlai, the greatest hetman after Hmelnitski; whoso has not heard of Zagloba was shelling peas, it is clear, in the first period of the Cossack war, or feeling hens (for eggs), or herding calves⁠—labors which I do not connect with such honorable cavaliers as you.”</p>
			<p>“He is a great knight!” called numerous voices. “There is no greater in the Commonwealth! Hear!”</p>
			<p>“Listen, honorable gentlemen. My old bones craved repose; better for me to rest in the bakehouse, to eat cheese and cream, to walk in the gardens and gather apples, or putting my hands behind my back to stand over harvesters or pat a girl on the shoulder. And it is certain that for the enemy it would have been better to leave me at rest; for the Swedes and the Cossacks know that I have a very heavy hand, and God grant that my name is as well known to you, gentlemen, as to the enemy.”</p>
			<p>“What kind of rooster is that crowing so loud?” asked some voice in the crowd, suddenly.</p>
			<p>“Don’t interrupt! Would you were dead!” cried others.</p>
			<p>But Zagloba heard him. “Forgive that cockerel, gentlemen,” said he; “for he knows not yet on which end of him is his tail, nor on which his head.”</p>
			<p>The nobles burst into mighty laughter, and the confused disturber pushed quickly behind the crowd, to escape the sneers which came raining on his head.</p>
			<p>“I return to the subject,” said Zagloba. “I repeat, rest would be proper for me; but because the country is in a paroxysm, because the enemy is trampling our land, I am here, worthy gentlemen, with you to resist the enemy in the name of that mother who nourished us all. Whoso will not stand by her today, whoso will not run to save her, is not a son, but a stepson; he is unworthy of her love. I, an old man, am going, let the will of God be done; and if it comes to me to die, with my last breath will I cry, ‘Against the Swedes! brothers, against the Swedes!’ Let us swear that we will not drop the sabre from our hands till we drive them out of the country.”</p>
			<p>“We are ready to do that without oaths!” cried numbers of voices. “We will go where our hetman the prince leads us; we will go where ’tis needful.”</p>
			<p>“Worthy brothers, you have seen how two stocking-wearers came here in a gilded carriage. They know that there is no trifling with Radzivill. They will follow him from chamber to chamber, and kiss him on the elbows to give them peace. But the prince, worthy gentlemen, with whom I have been advising and from whom I have just returned, has assured me, in the name of all Lithuania, that there will be no negotiations, no parchments, nothing but war and war!”</p>
			<p>“War! war!” repeated, as an echo, the voices of the hearers.</p>
			<p>“But because the leader,” continued Zagloba, “will begin the more boldly, the surer he is of his soldiers, let us show him, worthy gentlemen, our sentiments. And now let us go under the windows of the prince and shout, ‘Down with the Swedes!’ After me, worthy gentlemen!”</p>
			<p>Then he sprang from the post and moved forward, and after him the crowd. They came under the very windows with an uproar increasing each moment, till at last it was mingled in one gigantic shout⁠—“Down with the Swedes! down with the Swedes!”</p>
			<p>Immediately Pan Korf, the <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i> of Venden, ran out of the antechamber greatly confused; after him Ganhoff; and both began to restrain the nobles, quieting them, begging them to disperse.</p>
			<p>“For God’s sake!” said Korf, “in the upper hall the windowpanes are rattling. You gentlemen do not think what an awkward time you have chosen for your shouting. How can you treat envoys with disrespect, and give an example of insubordination? Who roused you to this?”</p>
			<p>“I,” said Zagloba. “Your grace, tell the prince, in the name of us all, that we beg him to be firm, that we are ready to remain with him to the last drop of our blood.”</p>
			<p>“I thank you, gentlemen, in the name of the hetman, I thank you; but I beg you to disperse. Consider, worthy gentlemen. By the living God, consider that you are sinking the country! Whoso insults an envoy today, renders a bear’s service to the Commonwealth.”</p>
			<p>“What do we care for envoys! We want to fight, not to negotiate!”</p>
			<p>“Your courage comforts me. The time for fighting will come before long, God grant very soon. Rest now before the expedition. It is time for a drink of spirits and lunch. It is bad to fight on an empty stomach.”</p>
			<p>“That is as true as I live!” cried Zagloba, first.</p>
			<p>“True, he struck the right spot. Since the prince knows our sentiments, we have nothing to do here!”</p>
			<p>And the crowd began to disperse. The greater part flowed on to rooms in which many tables were already spread. Zagloba sat at the head of one of them. Pan Korf and Colonel Ganhoff returned then to the prince, who was sitting at counsel with the Swedish envoys, Bishop Parchevski, Father Byalozor, Pan Adam Komorovski, and Pan Alexander Myerzeyevski, a courtier of Yan Kazimir, who was stopping for the time in Kyedani.</p>
			<p>“Who incited that tumult?” asked the prince, from whose lion-like face anger had not yet disappeared.</p>
			<p>“It was that noble who has just come here, that famous Zagloba,” answered Pan Korf.</p>
			<p>“That is a brave knight,” said the prince, “but he is beginning to manage me too soon.”</p>
			<p>Having said this, he beckoned to Colonel Ganhoff and whispered something in his ear.</p>
			<p>Zagloba meanwhile, delighted with himself, went to the lower halls with solemn tread, having with him Volodyovski, with Yan and Stanislav Skshetuski.</p>
			<p>“Well, friends, I have barely appeared and have roused love for the country in those nobles. It will be easier now for the prince to send off the envoys with nothing, for all he has to do is to call upon us. That will not be, I think, without reward, though it is more a question of honor with me. Why have you halted, Michael, as if turned to stone, with eyes fixed on that carriage at the gate?”</p>
			<p>“That is she!” said Volodyovski, with twitching mustaches. “By the living God, that is she herself!”</p>
			<p>“Who?”</p>
			<p>“Panna Billevich.”</p>
			<p>“She who refused you?”</p>
			<p>“The same. Look, gentlemen, look! Might not a man wither away from regret?”</p>
			<p>“Wait a minute!” said Zagloba, “we must have a closer look.”</p>
			<p>Meanwhile the carriage, describing a half-circle, approached the speakers. Sitting in it was a stately noble with gray mustaches, and at his side Panna Aleksandra; beautiful as ever, calm, and full of dignity.</p>
			<p>Pan Michael fixed on her a complaining look and bowed low, but she did not see him in the crowd.</p>
			<p>“That is some lordly child,” said Zagloba, gazing at her fine, noble features, “too delicate for a soldier. I confess that she is a beauty, but I prefer one of such kind that for the moment you would ask, ‘Is that a cannon or a woman?’ ”</p>
			<p>“Do you know who that is who has just passed?” asked Pan Michael of a noble standing near.</p>
			<p>“Of course,” answered the noble; “that is Pan Tomash Billevich, sword-bearer of Rossyeni. All here know him, for he is an old servant and friend of the Radzivills.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
