<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-26" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</h2>
			<p>Kovno, and the whole region on the left bank of the Vilia, with all the roads, were occupied by the enemy (the Russians); therefore Kmita, not being able to go to Podlyasye by the highroad leading from Kovno to Grodno and thence to Byalystok, went by side-roads from Kyedani straight down the course of the Nyevyaja to the Nyemen, which he crossed near Vilkovo, and found himself in the province of Trotsk.</p>
			<p>All that part of the road, which was not over great, he passed in quiet, for that region lay as it were under the hand of Radzivill.</p>
			<p>Towns, and here and there even villages, were occupied by castle squadrons of the hetman, or by small detachments of Swedish cavalry which the hetman pushed forward thus far of purpose against the legions of Zolotarenko, which stood there beyond the Vilia, so that occasions for collisions and war might be more easily found.</p>
			<p>Zolotarenko would have been glad too to have an “uproar” with the Swedes, according to the words of the hetman; but those whose ally he was did not wish war with them, or in every case wished to put it off as long as possible. Zolotarenko therefore received the strictest orders not to cross the river, and in case that Radzivill himself, together with the Swedes, moved on him, to retreat with all haste.</p>
			<p>For these reasons the country on the right side of the Vilia was quiet; but since from one side Cossack pickets, from the other those of the Swedes and Radzivill were looking at one another, one musket-shot might at any, moment let loose a terrible war.</p>
			<p>In prevision of this, people took timely refuge in safe places. Therefore the whole country was quiet, but empty. Pan Andrei saw deserted towns, everywhere the windows of houses held up by sticks, and whole villages depopulated. The fields were also empty, for there was no crop that year. Common people secreted themselves in fathomless forests, to which they drove all their cattle; but the nobles fled to neighboring Electoral Prussia, at that time altogether safe from war. For this reason there was an uncommon movement over the roads and trails of the wilderness, and the number of fugitives was still more increased by those who from the left bank of the Vilia were able to escape the oppression of Zolotarenko.</p>
			<p>The number of these was enormous, and especially of peasants; for the nobles who had not been able hitherto to flee from the left bank went into captivity or yielded their lives on their thresholds.</p>
			<p>Pan Andrei, therefore, met every moment whole crowds of peasants with their wives and children, and driving before them flocks of sheep with horses and cattle. That part of the province of Trotsk touching upon Electoral Prussia was wealthy and productive; therefore the well-to-do people had something to save and guard. The approaching winter did not alarm fugitives, who preferred to await better days amid mosses of the forest, in snow covered huts, than to await death in their native villages at the hands of the enemy.</p>
			<p>Kmita often approached the fleeing crowds, or fires gleaming at night in dense forest places. Wherever he met people from the left bank of the Vilia, from near Kovno, or from still remoter neighborhoods, he heard terrible tales of the cruelties of Zolotarenko and his allies, who exterminated people without regard to age or sex; they burned villages, cut down even trees in the gardens, leaving only land and water. Never had Tartar raids left such desolation behind.</p>
			<p>Not death alone was inflicted on the inhabitants, but before death they were put to the most ingenious tortures. Many of those people fled with bewildered minds. These filled the forest depths at night with awful shrieks; others were ever in a species of continual fear and expectation of attack, though they had crossed the Nyemen and Vilia, though forests and morasses separated them from Zolotarenko’s bands. Many of these stretched their hands to Kmita and his horsemen of Orsha, imploring rescue and pity, as if the enemy were standing there over them.</p>
			<p>Carriages belonging to nobles were moving toward Prussia; in them old men, women, and children; behind them, dragged on wagons with servants, effects, supplies of provisions, and other things. All these fleeing people were panic-stricken, terrified and grieved because they were going into exile.</p>
			<p>Pan Andrei comforted these unfortunates at times by telling them that the Swedes would soon pass over and drive that enemy far away. Then the fugitives stretched their hands to heaven and said,⁠—</p>
			<p>“God give health, God give fortune to the prince <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i>! When the Swedes come we will return to our homes, to our burned dwellings.”</p>
			<p>And they blessed the prince everywhere. From mouth to mouth news was given that at any moment he might cross the Vilia at the head of his own and Swedish troops. Besides, they praised the “modesty” of the Swedes, their discipline, and good treatment of the inhabitants. Radzivill was called the Gideon of Lithuania, a Samson, a savior. These people from districts steaming with fresh blood and fire were looking for him as for deliverance.</p>
			<p>And Kmita, hearing those blessings, those wishes, those almost prayers, was strengthened in his faith concerning Radzivill, and repeated in his soul,⁠—</p>
			<p>“I serve such a lord! I will shut my eyes and follow blindly his fortune. At times he is terrible and beyond knowing; but he has a greater mind than others, he knows better what is needed, and in him alone is salvation.”</p>
			<p>It became lighter and calmer in his breast at this thought; he advanced therefore with greater solace in his heart, dividing his soul between sorrow for Kyedani and thoughts on the unhappy condition of the country.</p>
			<p>His sorrow increased continually. He did not throw the red ribbon behind him, he did not put out the fire with water; for he felt, first, that it was useless, and then he did not wish to do so.</p>
			<p>“Oh that she were present, that she could hear the wailing and groans of people, she would not beg God to turn me away, she would not tell me that I err, like those heretics who have left the true faith. But never mind! Earlier or later she will be convinced, she will see that her own judgment was at fault. And then what God will give will be. Maybe we shall meet again in life.”</p>
			<p>And yearning increased in the young cavalier; but the conviction that he was marching by the right, not by the wrong road, gave him a peace long since unknown. The conflict of thought, the gnawing, the doubts left him by degrees, and he rode forward; he sank in the shoreless forest almost with gladness. From the time that he had come to Lyubich, after his famous raids on Hovanski, he had not felt so vivacious.</p>
			<p>Kharlamp was right in this, that there is no cure like the road for cares and troubles. Pan Andrei had iron health; his daring and love of adventures were coming back every hour. He saw these adventures before him, smiled at them, and urged on his convoy unceasingly, barely stopping for short night-rests.</p>
			<p>Olenka stood ever before the eyes of his spirit, tearful, trembling in his arms like a bird, and he said to himself, “I shall return.”</p>
			<p>At times the form of the hetman passed before him, gloomy, immense, terrible. But it may be just because he was moving away more and more, that that form became almost dear to him. Hitherto he had bent before Radzivill; now he began to love him. Hitherto Radzivill had borne him along as a mighty whirlpool of water seizes and attracts everything that comes within its circle; now Kmita felt that he wished with his whole soul to go with him.</p>
			<p>And in the distance that gigantic <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i> increased continually in the eyes of the young knight, and assumed almost superhuman proportions. More than once, at his night halt, when Pan Andrei had closed his eyes in sleep, he saw the hetman sitting on a throne loftier than the tops of the pine-trees. There was a crown on his head; his face was the same, gloomy, enormous; in his hand a sword and a sceptre, at his feet the whole Commonwealth. And in his soul Kmita did homage to greatness.</p>
			<p>On the third day of the journey they left the Nyemen far behind, and entered a country of still greater forests. They met whole crowds of fugitives on the roads; but nobles unable to bear arms were going almost without exception to Prussia before the bands of the enemy, who, not held in curb there, as on the banks of the Vilia, by the regiments of Sweden and Radzivill, pushed at times far into the heart of the country, even to the boundary of Electoral Prussia. Their main object was plunder.</p>
			<p>Frequently these were detachments as if from the army of Zolotarenko, but really recognizing no authority,⁠—simply robber companies, so called “parties” commanded at times even by local bandits. Avoiding engagements in the field with troops and even with townspeople, they attacked small villages, single houses, and travellers.</p>
			<p>The nobles on their own account attacked these parties with their household servants, and ornamented with them the pine-trees along the roads; still it was easy in the forest to stumble upon their frequent bands, and therefore Pan Andrei was forced to exercise uncommon care.</p>
			<p>But somewhat beyond Pilvishki on the Sheshupa, Kmita found the population living quietly in their homes. The townspeople told him, however, that not longer than a couple of days before, a strong band of Zolotarenko’s men, numbering as many as five hundred, had made an attack, and would, according to their custom, have cut down all the people, and let the place rise in smoke, were it not for unexpected aid which fell as it were from heaven.</p>
			<p>“We had already committed ourselves to God,” said the master of the inn in which Pan Andrei had taken lodgings, “when the saints of the Lord sent some squadrons. We thought at first that a new enemy had come, but they were ours. They sprang at once on Zolotarenko’s ruffians, and in an hour they laid them out like a pavement, all the more easily as we helped them.”</p>
			<p>“What kind of a squadron was it?” asked Kmita.</p>
			<p>“God give them health! They did not say who they were, and we did not dare to ask. They fed their horses, took what hay and bread there was, and rode away.”</p>
			<p>“But whence did they come, and whither did they go?”</p>
			<p>“They came from Kozlova Ruda, and they went to the south. We, who before that wished to flee to the woods, thought the matter over and stayed here, for the under-starosta said that after such a lesson the enemy would not look in on us again soon.”</p>
			<p>The news of the battle interested Kmita greatly, therefore he asked further: “And do you not know who commanded that squadron?”</p>
			<p>“We do not know; but we saw the colonel, for he talked with us on the square, he is young, and sharp as a needle. He does not look like the warrior that he is.”</p>
			<p>“Volodyovski!” cried Kmita.</p>
			<p>“Whether he is Volodyovski, or not, may his hands be holy, may God make him hetman!”</p>
			<p>Pan Andrei fell into deep thought. Evidently he was going by the same road over which a few days before Volodyovski had marched with the Lauda men. In fact, that was natural, for both were going to Podlyasye. But it occurred to Pan Andrei that if he hastened he might easily meet the little knight and be captured; in that case, all the letters of Radzivill would fall with him into possession of the confederates. Such an event might destroy his mission, and bring God knows what harm to the cause of Radzivill. For this reason Pan Andrei determined to stay a couple of days in Pilvishki, so that the squadron of Lauda might have time to advance as far as possible.</p>
			<p>The men, as well as the horses, travelling almost with one sweep from Kyedani (for only short halts had been given on the road hitherto), needed rest; therefore Kmita ordered the soldiers to remove the packs from the horses and settle themselves comfortably in the inn.</p>
			<p>Next day he was convinced that he had acted not only cleverly but wisely, for scarcely had he dressed in the morning, when his host stood before him.</p>
			<p>“I bring news to your grace,” said he.</p>
			<p>“It is good?”</p>
			<p>“Neither good nor bad, but that we have guests. An enormous court arrived here today, and stopped at the starosta’s house. There is a regiment of infantry, and what crowds of cavalry and carriages with servants!⁠—The people thought that the king himself had come.”</p>
			<p>“What king?”</p>
			<p>The innkeeper began to turn his cap in his hand. “It is true that we have two kings now, but neither one came,⁠—only the prince marshal.”</p>
			<p>Kmita sprang to his feet. “What prince marshal? Prince Boguslav?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, your grace; the cousin of the prince <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i> of Vilna.”</p>
			<p>Pan Andrei clapped his hands from astonishment. “And so we have met.”</p>
			<p>The innkeeper, understanding that his guest was an acquaintance of Prince Boguslav, made a lower bow than the day before, and went out of the room; but Kmita began to dress in haste, and an hour later was before the house of the starosta.</p>
			<p>The whole place was swarming with soldiers. The infantry were stacking their muskets on the square; the cavalry had dismounted and occupied the houses at the side. The soldiers and attendants in the most varied costumes had halted before the houses, or were walking along the streets. From the mouths of the officers were to be heard French and German. Nowhere a Polish soldier, nowhere a Polish uniform; the musketeers and dragoons were dressed in strange fashion, different, indeed, from the foreign squadrons which Pan Andrei had seen in Kyedani, for they were not in German but in French style. The soldiers, handsome men and so showy that each one in the ranks might be taken for an officer, delighted the eyes of Pan Andrei. The officers looked on him also with curiosity, for he had arrayed himself richly in velvet and brocade, and six men, dressed in new uniforms, followed him as a suite.</p>
			<p>Attendants, all dressed in French fashion, were hurrying about in front of the starosta’s house; there were pages in caps and feathers, armor-bearers in velvet kaftans, and equerries in Swedish, high, wide-legged boots.</p>
			<p>Evidently the prince did not intend to tarry long in Pilvishki, and had stopped only for refreshment, for the carriages were not taken to the shed; and the equerries, in waiting, were feeding horses out of tin sieves which they held in their hands.</p>
			<p>Kmita announced to an officer on guard before the house who he was and what was his mission; the officer went to inform the prince. After a while he returned hastily, to say that the prince was anxious to see a man sent from the hetman; and showing Kmita the way, he entered the house with him.</p>
			<p>After they had passed the antechamber, they found in the dining-hall a number of attendants, with legs stretched out, slumbering sweetly in armchairs; it was evident that they must have started early in the morning from the last halting-place: The officer stopped before the door of the next room, and bowing to Pan Andrei, said,⁠—</p>
			<p>“The prince is there.”</p>
			<p>Pan Andrei entered and stopped at the threshold. The prince was sitting before a mirror fixed in the corner of the room, and was looking so intently at his own face, apparently just touched with rouge and white, that he did not turn attention to the incomer. Two chamber servants, kneeling before him, were fastening buckles at the ankles on his high travelling-boots, while he was arranging slowly with his fingers the luxuriant, evenly cut forelock of his bright gold-colored wig, or it might be of his own abundant hair.</p>
			<p>He was still a young man, of thirty-five years, but seemed not more than five and twenty. Kmita knew the prince, but looked on him always with curiosity: first, because of the great knightly fame which surrounded him, and which was won mainly through duels fought with various foreign magnates; second, by reason of his peculiar figure,⁠—whoso saw his form once was forced to remember it ever after. The prince was tall and powerfully built, but on his broad shoulders stood a head as diminutive as if taken from another body. His face, also, was uncommonly small, almost childlike; but in it, too, there was no proportion, for he had a great Roman nose and enormous eyes of unspeakable beauty and brightness, with a real eagle boldness of glance. In presence of those eyes and the nose, the rest of his face, surrounded, moreover, with plentiful tresses of hair, disappeared almost completely; his mouth was almost that of a child; above it was a slight mustache barely covering his upper lip. The delicacy of his complexion, heightened by rouge and white paint, made him almost like a young lady; and at the same time the insolence, pride, and self-confidence depicted in that face permitted no one to forget that he was that <i xml:lang="fr">chercheur de noises</i> (seeker of quarrels), as he was nicknamed at the French court,⁠—a man out of whose mouth a sharp word came with ease, but whose sword came from its scabbard with still greater ease.</p>
			<p>In Germany, in Holland, in France, they related marvels of his military deeds, of his disputes, quarrels, adventures, and duels. He was the man who in Holland rushed into the thickest whirl of battle, among the incomparable regiments of Spanish infantry, and with his own princely hand captured a flag and a cannon; he, at the head of the regiments of the Prince of Orange, captured batteries declared by old leaders to be beyond capture; he, on the Rhine, at the head of French musketeers, shattered the heavy squadrons of Germany, trained in the Thirty Years’ War; he wounded, in a duel in France, the most celebrated fencer among French knights. Prince de Fremouille; another famous fighter, Baron Von Goetz, begged of him life, on his knees; he wounded Baron Grot, for which he had to hear bitter reproaches from his cousin Yanush, because he was lowering his dignity as prince by fighting with men beneath him in rank; finally, in presence of the whole French court, at a ball in the Louvre, he slapped Marquis de Rieux on the face, because he had spoken to him “unbecomingly.” The duels that he had fought incognito in smaller towns, in taverns and inns, did not enter into reckoning.</p>
			<p>He was a mixture of effeminacy and unbounded daring. During rare and short visits to his native land he amused himself by quarrels with the Sapyehas, and with hunting; but on those occasions the hunters had to find for him she-bears with their young, as being dangerous and enraged; against these he went armed only with a spear.</p>
			<p>But it was tedious for him in his own country, to which he came, as was said, unwillingly, most frequently in time of war; he distinguished himself by great victories at Berestechko, Mogilyoff, and Smolensk. War was his element, though he had a mind quick and subtle, equally fitted for intrigues and diplomatic exploits. In these he knew how to be patient and enduring, far more enduring than in the “loves,” of which a whole series completed the history of his life. The prince, at the courts where he had resided, was the terror of husbands who had beautiful wives. For that reason, doubtless, he was not yet married, though his high birth and almost inexhaustible fortune made him one of the most desirable matches in Europe. The King and Queen of France, Marya Ludvika of Poland, the Prince of Orange, and his uncle, the Elector of Brandenburg, tried to make matches for him; but so far he preferred his freedom.</p>
			<p>“I do not want a dower,” said he, cynically; “and of the other pleasures I have no lack as I am.”</p>
			<p>In this fashion he reached the thirty-fifth year of his age.</p>
			<p>Kmita, standing on the threshold, examined with curiosity Boguslav’s face, which the mirror reflected, while he was arranging with seriousness the hair of his forelock; at last, when Pan Andrei coughed once and a second time, he said, without turning his head,⁠—</p>
			<p>“But who is present? Is it a messenger from the prince <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i>?”</p>
			<p>“Not a messenger, but from the prince <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i>,” replied Pan Andrei.</p>
			<p>Then the prince turned his head, and seeing a brilliant young man, recognized that he had not to do with an ordinary servant.</p>
			<p>“Pardon, Cavalier,” said he, affably, “for I see that I was mistaken in the office of the person. But your face is known to me, though I am not able to recall your name. You are an attendant of the prince hetman?”</p>
			<p>“My name is Kmita,” answered Pan Andrei, “and I am not an attendant; I am a colonel from the time that I brought my own squadron to the prince hetman.”</p>
			<p>“Kmita!” cried the prince, “that same Kmita, famous in the last war, who harried Hovanski, and later on managed not worse on his own account? I have heard much about you.”</p>
			<p>Having said this, the prince began to look more carefully and with a certain pleasure at Pan Andrei, for from what he had heard he thought him a man of his own cut.</p>
			<p>“Sit down,” said he, “I am glad to know you more intimately. And what is to be heard in Kyedani?”</p>
			<p>“Here is a letter from the prince hetman,” answered Kmita.</p>
			<p>The servants, having finished buckling the prince’s boots, went out. The prince broke the seal and began to read. After a while there was an expression of weariness and dissatisfaction on his face. He threw the letter under the mirror and said,⁠—</p>
			<p>“Nothing new! The prince <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i> advises me to go to Prussia, to Tyltsa or to Taurogi, which, as you see, I am just doing. <i xml:lang="fr">Ma foi</i>, I do not understand my cousin. He reports to me that the elector is in Brandenburg, and that he cannot make his way to Prussia through the Swedes, and he writes at the same time that the hairs are standing on his head because I do not communicate with him, either for health or prescription; and how can I? If the elector cannot make his way through the Swedes, how can my messenger do so? I am in Podlyasye, for I have nothing else to do. I tell you, my cavalier, that I am as much bored as the devil doing penance. I have speared all the bears near Tykotsin; the fair heads of that region have the odor of sheepskin, which my nostrils cannot endure. But⁠—Do you understand French or German?”</p>
			<p>“I understand German,” answered Kmita.</p>
			<p>“Praise be to God for that! I will speak German, for my lips fly off from your language.”</p>
			<p>When he had said this the prince put out his lower lip and touched it with his fingers, as if wishing to be sure that it had not gone off: then he looked at the mirror and continued,⁠—</p>
			<p>“Report has come to me that in the neighborhood of Lukovo one Skshetuski, a noble, has a wife of wonderful beauty. It is far from here; but I sent men to carry her off and bring her. Now, if you will believe it, Pan Kmita, they did not find her at home.”</p>
			<p>“That was good luck,” said Pan Andrei, “for she is the wife of an honorable cavalier, a celebrated man, who made his way out of Zbaraj through the whole power of Hmelnitski.”</p>
			<p>“The husband was besieged in Zbaraj, and I would have besieged the wife in Tykotsin. Do you think she would have held out as stubbornly as her husband?”</p>
			<p>“Your highness, for such a siege a counsel of war is not needed, let it pass without my opinion,” answered Pan Andrei, brusquely.</p>
			<p>“True, loss of time!” said the prince. “Let us return to business. Have you any letters yet?”</p>
			<p>“What I had to your highness I have delivered; besides those I have one to the King of Sweden. Is it known to your highness where I must seek him?”</p>
			<p>“I know nothing. What can I know? He is not in Tykotsin; I can assure you of that, for if he had once seen that place he would have resigned his dominion over the whole Commonwealth. Warsaw is now in Swedish hands, but you will not find the king there. He must be before Krakow, or in Krakow itself, if he has not gone to Royal Prussia by this time. To my thinking Karl Gustav must keep the Prussian towns in mind, for he cannot leave them in his rear. Who would have expected, when the whole Commonwealth abandons its king, when all the nobles join the Swedes, when the provinces yield one after the other, that just then towns, German and Protestant, would not hear of the Swedes but prepare for resistance? They wish to save the Commonwealth and adhere to Yan Kazimir. In beginning our work we thought that it would be otherwise: that before all they would help us and the Swedes to cut that loaf which you call your Commonwealth; but now they won’t move! The luck is that the elector has his eye on them. He has offered them forces already against the Swedes; but the Dantzig people do not trust him, and say that they have forces enough of their own.”</p>
			<p>“We knew that already in Kyedani,” said Kmita.</p>
			<p>“If they have not forces enough, in every case they have a good sniff,” continued the prince, laughing; “for the elector cares as much, I think, about the Commonwealth as I do, or as the prince <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i> of Vilna does.”</p>
			<p>“Your highness, permit me to deny that,” said Kmita, abruptly. “The prince cares that much about the Commonwealth that he is ready at every moment to give his last breath and spill his last blood for it.”</p>
			<p>Prince Boguslav began to laugh.</p>
			<p>“You are young, Cavalier, young! But enough! My uncle the elector wants to grab Royal Prussia, and for that reason only, he offers his aid. If he has the towns once in hand, if he has his garrisons in them, he will be ready to agree with the Swedes next day, nay, even with the Turks or with devils. Let the Swedes add a bit of Great Poland, he will be ready to help them with all his power to take the rest. The only trouble is in this, that the Swedes are sharpening their teeth against Prussia, and hence the distrust between them and the elector.”</p>
			<p>“I hear with astonishment the words of your highness,” said Kmita.</p>
			<p>“The devils were taking me in Podlyasye,” answered the prince,⁠—“I had to stay there so long in idleness. But what was I to do? An agreement was made between me and the prince <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i>, that until affairs were cleared up in Prussia, I was not to take the Swedish side publicly. And that was right, for thus a gate remains open. I sent even secret couriers to Yan Kazimir, announcing that I was ready to summon the general militia in Podlyasye if a manifesto were sent me. The king, as king, might have let himself be tricked; but the queen it is clear does not trust me, and must have advised against it. If it were not for that woman, I should be today at the head of all the nobles of Podlyasye; and what is more, those confederates who are now ravaging the property of Prince Yanush would have no choice but to come under my orders. I should have declared myself a partisan of Yan Kazimir, but, in fact, having power in my hand, would treat with the Swedes. But that woman knows how grass grows, and guesses the most secret thought. She is the real king, not queen! She has more wit in one finger than Yan Kazimir in his whole body.”</p>
			<p>“The prince <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i>⁠—” began Kmita.</p>
			<p>“The prince <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i>,” interrupted Boguslav, with impatience, “is eternally late with his counsel; he writes to me in every letter, ‘Do this and do that,’ while I have in fact done it long before. Besides, the prince <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i> loses his head. For listen what he asks of me.”</p>
			<p>Here the prince took up the letter and began to read aloud,⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>“Be cautious yourself on the road; and those rascals, the confederates, who have mutinied against me and are ravaging Podlyasye, for God’s sake think how to disperse them, lest they go to the king. They are preparing to visit Zabludovo, and beer in that place is strong; when they get drunk, let them be cut off,⁠—each host may finish his guest. Nothing better is needed; for when the heads are removed, the rest will scatter⁠—”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Boguslav threw the letter with vexation on the table.</p>
			<p>“Listen, Pan Kmita,” said he, “you see I have to go to Prussia and at the same time arrange a slaughter in Zabludovo. I must feign myself a partisan of Yan Kazimir and a patriot, and at the same time cut off those people who are unwilling to betray the king and the country. Is that sense? Does one hang to the other? <i xml:lang="fr">Ma foi</i>, the prince is losing his head. I have met now, while coming to Pilvishki, a whole insurgent squadron travelling along through Podlyasye. I should have galloped over their stomachs with gladness, even to gain some amusement; but before I am an open partisan of the Swedes, while my uncle the elector holds formally with the Prussian towns, and with Yan Kazimir too, I cannot permit myself such pleasure, God knows I cannot. What could I do more than to be polite to those insurgents, as they are polite to me, suspecting me of an understanding with the hetman, but not having black on white?”</p>
			<p>Here the prince lay back comfortably in the armchair, stretched out his legs, and putting his hands behind his head carelessly, began to repeat,⁠—</p>
			<p>“Ah, there is nonsense in this Commonwealth, nonsense! In the world there is nothing like it!”</p>
			<p>Then he was silent for a moment; evidently some idea came to his head, for he struck his wig and inquired,⁠—</p>
			<p>“But will you not be in Podlyasye?”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Kmita, “I must be there, for I have a letter with instructions to Harasimovich, the under-starosta in Zabludovo.”</p>
			<p>“In God’s name!” exclaimed the prince, “Harasimovich is here with me. He is going with the hetman’s effects to Prussia, for we were afraid that they might fall into the hands of the confederates. Wait, I will have him summoned.”</p>
			<p>Here the prince summoned a servant and ordered him to call the under-starosta.</p>
			<p>“This has happened well,” said the prince, “You will save yourself a journey,⁠—though it may be too bad that you will not visit Podlyasye, for among the heads of the confederacy there is a namesake of yours whom you might secure.”</p>
			<p>“I have no time for that,” said Kmita, “since I am in a hurry to go to the king and Pan Lyubomirski.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, you have a letter to the marshal of the kingdom? Well, I can divine the reason of it. Once the marshal thought of marrying his son to Yanush’s daughter. Did not the hetman wish this time to renew negotiations delicately?”</p>
			<p>“That is just the mission.”</p>
			<p>“Both are quite children. H’m! that’s a delicate mission, for it does not become the hetman to speak first. Besides⁠—”</p>
			<p>Here the prince frowned.</p>
			<p>“Nothing will come of it. The daughter of the hetman is not for Heraclius, I tell you that! The prince hetman must understand that his fortune is to remain in possession of the Radzivills.”</p>
			<p>Kmita looked with astonishment on the prince, who was walking with quicker and quicker pace through the room.</p>
			<p>All at once he stopped before Pan Andrei, and said, “Give me the word of a cavalier that you will answer truly my question.”</p>
			<p>“Gracious prince,” said Kmita, “only those lie who are afraid, and I fear no man.”</p>
			<p>“Did the prince <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i> give orders to keep secret from me the negotiations with Lyubomirski?”</p>
			<p>“Had I such a command, I should not have mentioned Lyubomirski.”</p>
			<p>“It might have slipped you. Give me your word.”</p>
			<p>“I give it,” said Kmita, frowning.</p>
			<p>“You have taken a weight from my heart, for I thought that the <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i> was playing a double game with me.”</p>
			<p>“I do not understand, your highness.”</p>
			<p>“I would not marry, in France, Rohan, not counting half threescore other princesses whom they were giving me. Do you know why?”</p>
			<p>“I do not.”</p>
			<p>“There is an agreement between me and the prince <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i> that his daughter and his fortune are growing up for me. As a faithful servant of the Radzivills, you may know everything.”</p>
			<p>“Thank you for the confidence. But your highness is mistaken. I am not a servant of the Radzivills.”</p>
			<p>Boguslav opened his eyes widely. “What are you?”</p>
			<p>“I am a colonel of the hetman, not of the castle; and besides I am the hetman’s relative.”</p>
			<p>“A relative?”</p>
			<p>“I am related to the Kishkis, and the hetman is born of a Kishki.”</p>
			<p>Prince Boguslav looked for a while at Kmita, on whose face a light flush appeared. All at once he stretched forth his hands and said,⁠—</p>
			<p>“I beg your pardon, cousin, and I am glad of the relationship.”</p>
			<p>The last words were uttered with a certain inattentive though showy politeness, in which there was something directly painful to Pan Andrei. His face flushed still more, and he was opening his mouth to say something hasty, when the door opened and Harasimovich appeared on the threshold.</p>
			<p>“There is a letter for you,” said Boguslav.</p>
			<p>Harasimovich bowed to the prince, and then to Pan Andrei, who gave him the letter.</p>
			<p>“Read it!” said Prince Boguslav.</p>
			<p>Harasimovich began to read,⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>“Pan Harasimovich! Now is the time to show the good will of a faithful servant to his lord. As whatever money you are able to collect, you in Zabludovo and Pan Pjinski in Orel⁠—”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>“The confederates have slain Pan Pjinski in Orel, for which reason Pan Harasimovich has taken to his heels,” interrupted the prince.</p>
			<p>The under-starosta bowed and read further,⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>“⁠—and Pan Pjinski in Orel, even the public revenue, even the excise, rent⁠—”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>“The confederates have already taken them,” interrupted Boguslav again.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>“⁠—send me at once,” continued Harasimovich. “If you can mortgage some villages to neighbors or townspeople, obtaining as much money on them as possible, do so, and whatever means there may be of obtaining money, do your best in the matter, and send the money to me. Send horses and whatever effects there are in Orel. There is a great candlestick too, and other things,⁠—pictures, ornaments, and especially the cannons on the porch at my cousins; for robbers may be feared⁠—”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>“Again counsel too late, for these cannons are going with me,” said the prince.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>“If they are heavy with the stocks, then take them without the stocks and cover them, so it may not be known that you are bringing them. And take these things to Prussia with all speed, avoiding with utmost care those traitors who have caused mutiny in my army and are ravaging my estates⁠—”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>“As to ravaging, they are ravaging! They are pounding them into dough,” interrupted the prince anew.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>“⁠—ravaging my estates, and are preparing to move against Zabludovo on their way perhaps to the king. With them it is difficult to fight, for they are many; but if they are admitted, and given plenty to drink, and killed in the night while asleep (every host can do that), or poisoned in strong beer, or (which is not difficult in that place) a wild crowd let in to plunder them⁠—”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>“Well, that is nothing new!” said Prince Boguslav. “You may journey with me, Pan Harasimovich.”</p>
			<p>“There is still a supplement,” said the under-starosta. And he read on,</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>“The wines, if you cannot bring them away (for with us such can be had nowhere), sell them quickly⁠—”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Here Harasimovich stopped and seized himself by the head,⁠—</p>
			<p>“For God’s sake! those wines are coming half a day’s road behind us, and surely have fallen into the hands of that insurgent squadron which was hovering around us. There will be a loss of some thousands of gold pieces. Let your highness give witness with me that you commanded me to wait till the barrels were packed in the wagons.”</p>
			<p>Harasimovich’s terror would have been still greater had he known Pan Zagloba, and had he known that he was in that very squadron. Meanwhile Prince Boguslav smiled and said,⁠—</p>
			<p>“Oh, let the wines be to their health! Read on!”</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>“⁠—if a merchant cannot be found⁠—”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Prince Boguslav now held his sides from laughter. “He has been found,” said he, “but you must sell to him on credit.”</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p>“⁠—but if a merchant cannot be found,” read Harasimovich, in a complaining voice, “bury it in the ground secretly, so that more than two should not know where it is; but leave a keg in Orel and one in Zabludovo, and those of the best and sweetest, so that the officers may take a liking to it; and put in plenty of poison, so that the officers at least may be killed, then the squadron will break up. For God’s sake, serve me faithfully in this, and secretly, for the mercy of God. Burn what I write, and whoso finds out anything send him to me. Either the confederates will find and drink the wine, or it may be given as a present to make them friendly.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>The under-starosta finished reading, and looked at Prince Boguslav, as if waiting for instructions; and the prince said,⁠—</p>
			<p>“I see that my cousin pays much attention to the confederates; it is only a pity that, as usual, he is too late. If he had come upon this plan two weeks ago, or even one week, it might have been tried. But now go with God, Pan Harasimovich; I do not need you.”</p>
			<p>Harasimovich bowed and went out.</p>
			<p>Prince Boguslav stood before the mirror, and began to examine his own figure carefully; he moved his head slightly from right to left, then stepped back from the mirror, then approached it, then shook his curls, then looked askance, not paying any attention to Kmita, who sat in the shade with his back turned to the window.</p>
			<p>But if he had cast even one look at Pan Andrei’s face he would have seen that in the young envoy something wonderful was taking place; for Kmita’s face was pale, on his forehead stood thick drops of sweat, and his hands shook convulsively. After a while he rose from the chair, but sat down again immediately, like a man struggling with himself and suppressing an outburst of anger or despair. Finally his features settled and became fixed; evidently he had with his whole strong force of will and energy enjoined calm on himself and gained complete self-control.</p>
			<p>“Your highness,” said he, “from the confidence which the prince hetman bestows on me you see that he does not wish to make a secret of anything. I belong soul and substance to his work; with him and your highness my fortune may increase; therefore, whither you both go, thither go I also. I am ready for everything. But though I serve in those affairs and am occupied in them, still I do not of course understand everything perfectly, nor can I penetrate all the secrets of them with my weak wit.”</p>
			<p>“What do you wish then, Sir Cavalier, or rather, fair cousin?”</p>
			<p>“I ask instruction, your highness; it would be a shame indeed were I unable to learn at the side of such statesmen. I know not whether your highness will be pleased to answer me without reserve⁠—”</p>
			<p>“That will depend on your question and on my humor,” answered Boguslav, not ceasing to look at the mirror.</p>
			<p>Kmita’s eyes glittered for a moment, but he continued calmly,⁠—</p>
			<p>“This is my question: The prince <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i> of Vilna shields all his acts with the good and salvation of the Commonwealth, so that in fact the Commonwealth is never absent from his lips; be pleased to tell me sincerely, are these mere pretexts, or has the hetman in truth nothing but the good of the Commonwealth in view?”</p>
			<p>Boguslav cast a quick glance on Pan Andrei. “If I should say that they are pretexts, would you give further service?”</p>
			<p>Kmita shrugged his shoulders carelessly. “Of course! As I have said, my fortune will increase with the fortune of your highness and that of the hetman. If that increase comes, the rest is all one to me.”</p>
			<p>“You will be a man! Remember that I foretell this. But why has my cousin not spoken openly with you?”</p>
			<p>“Maybe because he is squeamish, or just because it did not happen to be the topic.”</p>
			<p>“You have quick wit, Cousin Cavalier, for it is the real truth that he is squeamish and shows his true skin unwillingly. As God is dear to me, true! Such is his nature. So, even in talking with me, the moment he forgets himself he begins to adorn his speech with love for the country. When I laugh at him to his eyes, he comes to his senses. True! true!”</p>
			<p>“Then it is merely a pretext?” asked Kmita.</p>
			<p>The prince turned the chair around and sat astride of it, as on a horse, and resting his arms on the back of it was silent awhile, as if in thought; then he said,⁠—</p>
			<p>“Hear me, Pan Kmita. If we Radzivills lived in Spain, France, or Sweden, where the son inherits after the father, and where the right of the king comes from God himself, then, leaving aside civil war, extinction of the royal stock, or some uncommon event, we should serve the king and the country firmly, being content with the highest offices which belong to us by family and fortune. But here, in the land where the king has not divine right at his back, but the nobles create him, where everything is in free suffrage, we ask ourselves with reason,⁠—Why should a Vaza rule, and not a Radzivill? There is no objection so far as the Vazas are concerned, for they take their origin from hereditary kings; but who will assure us, who will guarantee that after the Vazas the nobles will not have the whim of seating on the throne of the kingdom and on the throne of the Grand Principality even Pan Harasimovich, or some Pan Myeleshko, or some Pan Pyeglasyevich from Psivolki? Tfu! can I guess whom they may fancy? And must we, Radzivills, and princes of the German Empire, come to kiss the hand of King Pyeglasyevich? Tfu! to all the horned devils, Cavalier, it is time to finish with this! Look meanwhile at Germany,⁠—how many provincial princes there, who in importance and fortune are fitted to be under-starostas for us. Still they have their principalities, they rule, wear crowns on their heads, and take precedence of us, though it would be fitter for them to bear the trains of our mantles. It is time to put an end to this, and accomplish that which was already planned by my father.”</p>
			<p>Here the prince grew vivacious, rose from the chair, and began to walk through the room.</p>
			<p>“This will not take place without difficulty and obstacles,” continued he, “for the Radzivills of Olyta and Nyesvyej are not willing to aid us. I know that Prince Michael wrote to my cousin that he would better think of a hair-shirt than of a royal mantle. Let him think of a hair-shirt himself, let him do penance, let him sit on ashes, let the Jesuits lash his skin with disciplines; if he is content with being a royal carver, let him carve capons virtuously all his virtuous life, till his virtuous death! We shall get on without him and not drop our hands, for just now is the time. The devils are taking the Commonwealth; for now it is so weak, has gone to such dogs, that it cannot drive them away. Everyone is crawling in over its boundaries, as into an unfenced garden. What has happened here with the Swedes has happened nowhere on earth to this day. We, Sir Cavalier, may sing in truth ‘Te Deum laudamus.’ In its way the event is unheard of, unparalleled. Just think: an invader attacks a country, an invader famous for rapacity; and not only does he not find resistance, but every living man deserts his old king and hurries to a new one,⁠—magnates, nobles, the army, castles, towns, all,⁠—without honor, without fame, without feeling, without shame! History gives not another such example. Tfu! tfu! trash inhabit this country,⁠—men without conscience or ambition. And is such a country not to perish? They are looking for our favor! Ye will have favor! In Great Poland already the Swedes are thumb-screwing nobles; and so will it be everywhere,⁠—it cannot be otherwise.”</p>
			<p>Kmita grew paler and paler, but with the remnant of his strength he held in curb an outburst of fury; the prince, absorbed in his own speech, delighted with his own words, with his own wisdom, paid no attention to his listener, and continued,⁠—</p>
			<p>“There is a custom in this land that when a man is dying his relatives at the last moment pull the pillow from under his head, so that he may not suffer longer. I and the prince <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i> of Vilna have determined to render this special service to the Commonwealth. But because many plunderers are watching for the inheritance and we cannot get it all, we wish that a part, and that no small one, should come to us. As relatives, we have that right. If with this comparison I have not spoken on a level with your understanding, and have not been able to hit the point, I will tell you in other words: Suppose the Commonwealth a red cloth at which are pulling the Swedes, Hmelnitski, the Hyperboreans,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-23" id="noteref-23" epub:type="noteref">23</a> the Tartars, the elector, and whosoever lives around. But I and the prince <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i> of Vilna have agreed that enough of that cloth must remain in our hands to make a robe for us; therefore we do not prevent the dragging, but we drag ourselves. Let Hmelnitski stay in the Ukraine; let the Swedes and the elector settle about Prussia and Great Poland; let Rakotsy, or whoever is nearer, take Little Poland,⁠—Lithuania must be for Prince Yanush, and, together with his daughter, for me.”</p>
			<p>Kmita rose quickly. “I give thanks, your highness; that is all I wanted to know.”</p>
			<p>“You are going out. Sir Cavalier?”</p>
			<p>“I am.”</p>
			<p>The prince looked carefully at Kmita, and at that moment first noted his pallor and excitement.</p>
			<p>“What is the matter, Pan Kmita?” asked he. “You look like a ghost.”</p>
			<p>“Weariness has knocked me off my feet, and my head is dizzy. Farewell, your highness; I will come before starting, to bow to you again.”</p>
			<p>“Make haste, then, for I start after midday myself.”</p>
			<p>“I shall return in an hour at furthest.”</p>
			<p>When he had said this, Kmita bent his head and went out. In the other room the servants rose at sight of him, but he passed like a drunken man, seeing no one. At the threshold of the room he caught his head with both hands, and began to repeat, almost with a groan,⁠—</p>
			<p>“Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews! Jesus, Mary, Joseph!”</p>
			<p>With tottering steps he passed through the guard, composed of six men with halberds. Outside the gate were his own men, the sergeant Soroka at the head of them.</p>
			<p>“After me!” called Kmita. And he moved through the town toward the inn.</p>
			<p>Soroka, an old soldier of Kmita’s, knowing him perfectly, noticed at once that something uncommon had happened to the colonel.</p>
			<p>“Let your soul be on guard,” said he quietly to the men; “woe to him on whom his anger falls now!”</p>
			<p>The soldiers hastened their steps in silence, but Kmita did not go at a walk; he almost ran, waving his hand and repeating words well-nigh incoherent.</p>
			<p>To the ears of Soroka came only broken phrases,⁠—</p>
			<p>“Poisoners, faith-breakers, traitors! Crime and treason,⁠—the two are the same⁠—”</p>
			<p>Then he began to mention his old comrades. The names Kokosinski, Kulvyets, Ranitski, Rekuts, and others fell from his lips one after another; a number of times he mentioned Volodyovski. Soroka heard this with wonder, and grew more and more alarmed; but in his mind he thought,⁠—</p>
			<p>“Someone’s blood will flow; it cannot be otherwise.”</p>
			<p>Meanwhile they had come to the inn. Kmita shut himself in his room at once, and for about an hour he gave no sign of life. The soldiers meanwhile had tied on the packs and saddled the horses without order.</p>
			<p>“That is no harm,” said Soroka; “it is necessary to be ready for everything.”</p>
			<p>“We too are ready!” answered the old fighters, moving their mustaches.</p>
			<p>In fact, it came out soon that Soroka knew his colonel well; for Kmita appeared suddenly in the front room, without a cap, in his trousers and shirt only.</p>
			<p>“Saddle the horses!” cried he.</p>
			<p>“They are saddled.”</p>
			<p>“Fasten on the packs!”</p>
			<p>“They are fastened.”</p>
			<p>“A ducat a man!” cried the young colonel, who in spite of all his fever and excitement saw that those soldiers had guessed his thought quickly.</p>
			<p>“We give thanks, Commander!” cried all in chorus.</p>
			<p>“Two men will take the packhorses and go out of the place immediately toward Dembova. Go slowly through the town; outside the town put the horses on a gallop, and stop not till the forest is reached.”</p>
			<p>“According to command!”</p>
			<p>“Four others load their pistols. For me saddle two horses, and let another be ready.”</p>
			<p>“I knew there would be something!” muttered Soroka.</p>
			<p>“Now, Sergeant, after me!” cried Kmita.</p>
			<p>And undressed as he was, in trousers only, and open shirt, he went out of the front room. Soroka followed him, opening his eyes widely with wonder; they went in this fashion to the well in the yard of the inn. Here Kmita stopped, and pointing to the bucket hanging from the sweep, said,⁠—</p>
			<p>“Pour water on my head!”</p>
			<p>Soroka knew from experience how dangerous it was to ask twice about an order; he seized the rope, let the bucket down into the water, drew up quickly, and taking the bucket in his hands, threw the water on Pan Andrei, who, puffing and blowing like a whale, rubbed his wet hair with his hands, and cried,⁠—</p>
			<p>“More!”</p>
			<p>Soroka repeated the act, and threw water with all his force, just as if he were putting out a fire.</p>
			<p>“Enough!” said Kmita, at length. “Follow me, help me to dress.”</p>
			<p>Both went to the inn. At the gate they met the two men going out with two packhorses.</p>
			<p>“Slowly through the town; outside the town on a gallop!” commanded Kmita; and he wont in.</p>
			<p>Half an hour later he appeared dressed completely, as if for the road, with high boots and an elkskin coat, girded with a leather belt into which was thrust a pistol.</p>
			<p>The soldiers noticed, too, that from under his kaftan gleamed the edge of chain mail, as if he were going to battle. He had his sabre also girt high, so as to seize the hilt more easily. His face was calm enough, but stern and threatening. Casting a glance at the soldiers to see if they were ready and armed properly, he mounted his horse, and throwing a ducat at the innkeeper, rode out of the place.</p>
			<p>Soroka rode at his side; three others behind, leading a horse. Soon they found themselves on the square filled by Boguslav’s troops. There was movement among them already; evidently the command had come to prepare for the road. The horsemen were tightening the girths of the saddle and bridling the horses; the infantry were taking their muskets, stacked before the houses; others were attaching horses to wagons.</p>
			<p>Kmita started as it were from meditation.</p>
			<p>“Hear me, old man,” said he to Soroka; “from the starosta’s house does the road go on,⁠—it will not be necessary to come back through the square?”</p>
			<p>“But where are we going, Colonel?”</p>
			<p>“To Dembova.”</p>
			<p>“Then we must go from the square past the house. The square will be behind us.”</p>
			<p>“It is well,” said Kmita.</p>
			<p>“Oh, if only those men were alive now! Few are fitted for work like this,⁠—few!”</p>
			<p>Meanwhile they passed the square, and began to turn toward the starosta’s house, which lay about one furlong and a half farther on, near the roadside.</p>
			<p>“Stop!” cried Kmita, suddenly.</p>
			<p>The soldiers halted, and he turned to them. “Are you ready for death?” asked he, abruptly.</p>
			<p>“Ready!” answered in chorus these daredevils of Orsha.</p>
			<p>“We crawled up to Hovanski’s throat, and he did not devour us,⁠—do you remember?”</p>
			<p>“We remember!”</p>
			<p>“There is need to dare great things today. If success comes, our gracious king will make lords of you,⁠—I guarantee that! If failure, you will go to the stake!”</p>
			<p>“Why not success?” asked Soroka, whose eyes began to gleam like those of an old wolf.</p>
			<p>“There will be success!” said three others,⁠—Biloüs, Zavratynski, and Lubyenyets.</p>
			<p>“We must carry off the prince marshal!” said Kmita. Then he was silent, wishing to see the impression which the mad thought would make on the soldiers. But they were silent too, and looked on him as on a rainbow; only, their mustaches quivered, and their faces became terrible and murderous.</p>
			<p>“The stake is near, the reward far away,” added Kmita.</p>
			<p>“There are few of us,” muttered Zavratynski.</p>
			<p>“It is worse than against Hovanski,” said Lubyenyets.</p>
			<p>“The troops are all in the market-square, and at the house are only the sentries and about twenty attendants,” said Kmita, “who are off their guard, and have not even swords at their sides.”</p>
			<p>“You risk your head; why should we not risk ours?” said Soroka.</p>
			<p>“Hear me,” continued Kmita. “If we do not take him by cunning, we shall not take him at all. Listen! I will go into the room, and after a time come out with the prince. If the prince will sit on my horse, I will sit on the other, and we will ride on. When we have ridden about a hundred or a hundred and fifty yards, then seize him from both sides by the shoulders, and gallop the horses with all breath.”</p>
			<p>“According to order!” answered Soroka.</p>
			<p>“If I do not come out,” continued Kmita, “and you hear a shot in the room, then open on the guards with pistols, and give me the horse as I rush from the door.”</p>
			<p>“That will be done,” answered Soroka.</p>
			<p>“Forward!” commanded Kmita.</p>
			<p>They moved on, and a quarter of an hour later halted at the gate of the starosta’s house. At the gate were six guards with halberds; at the door of the anteroom four men were standing. Around a carriage in the front yard were occupied equerries and outriders, whom an attendant of consequence was overseeing,⁠—a foreigner, as might be known from his dress and wig.</p>
			<p>Farther on, near the carriage-house, horses were being attached to two other carriages, to which gigantic Turkish grooms were carrying packs. Over these watched a man dressed in black, with a face like that of a doctor or an astrologer.</p>
			<p>Kmita announced himself as he had previously, through the officer of the day, who returned soon and asked him to the prince.</p>
			<p>“How are you, Cavalier?” asked the prince, joyfully. “You left me so suddenly that I thought scruples had risen in you from my words, and I did not expect to see you again.”</p>
			<p>“Of course I could not go without making my obeisance.”</p>
			<p>“Well, I thought: the prince <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i> has known whom to send on a confidential mission. I make use of you also, for I give you letters to a number of important persons, and to the King of Sweden himself. But why armed as if for battle?”</p>
			<p>“I am going among confederates; I have heard right here in this place, and your highness has confirmed the report, that a confederate squadron passed. Even here in Pilvishki they brought a terrible panic on Zolotarenko’s men, for a famed soldier is leading that squadron.”</p>
			<p>“Who is he?”</p>
			<p>“Pan Volodyovski; and with him are Mirski, Oskyerko, and the two Skshetuskis,⁠—one that man of Zbaraj, whose wife your highness wanted to besiege in Tykotsin. All rebelled against the prince <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i>; and it is a pity, for they were good soldiers. What is to be done? There are still fools in the Commonwealth who are unwilling to pull the red cloth with Cossacks and Swedes.”</p>
			<p>“There is never a lack of fools in the world, and especially in this country,” said the prince. “Here are the letters; and besides, when you see his Swedish grace, say as if in confidence that in heart I am as much his adherent as my cousin, but for the time I must dissemble.”</p>
			<p>“Who is not forced to that?” answered Kmita. “Every man dissembles, especially if he thinks to do something great.”</p>
			<p>“That is surely the case. Acquit yourself well, Sir Cavalier, I will be thankful to you, and will not let the hetman surpass me in rewarding.”</p>
			<p>“If the favor of your highness is such, I ask reward in advance.”</p>
			<p>“You have it! Surely my cousin has not furnished you over abundantly for the road. There is a serpent in his money-box.”</p>
			<p>“May God guard me from asking money! I did not ask it of the hetman, and I will not take it from your highness. I am at my own expense, and I will remain so.”</p>
			<p>Prince Boguslav looked at the young knight with wonder. “I see that in truth the Kmitas are not of those who look at men’s hands. What is your wish then, Sir Cavalier?”</p>
			<p>“The matter is as follows: without thinking carefully in Kyedani, I took a horse of high blood, so as to show myself before the Swedes. I do not exaggerate when I say there is not a better in the stables of Kyedani. Now I am sorry for him, and I am afraid to injure him on the road, in the stables of inns, or for want of rest. And as accidents are not hard to meet, he may fall into enemies’ hands, even those of that Volodyovski, who personally is terribly hostile to me. I have thought, therefore, to beg your highness to take him to keep and use until I ask for him at a more convenient time.”</p>
			<p>“Better sell him to me.”</p>
			<p>“Impossible,⁠—it would be like selling a friend. At a small estimate that horse has taken me a hundred times out of the greatest danger; for he has this virtue too, that in battle he bites the enemy savagely.”</p>
			<p>“Is he such a good horse?” asked Prince Boguslav, with lively interest.</p>
			<p>“Is he good? If I were sure your highness would not be offended, I would bet a hundred gold florins without looking, that your highness has not such a one in your stables.”</p>
			<p>“Maybe I would bet, if it were not that today is not the time for a trial. I will keep him willingly, though; if possible, I would buy. But where is this wonder kept?”</p>
			<p>“My men are holding him just here in front of the gate. As to his being a wonder, he is a wonder; for it is no exaggeration to say that the Sultan might covet such a horse. He is not of this country, but from Anatolia; and in Anatolia, as I think, only one such was found.”</p>
			<p>“Then let us look at him.”</p>
			<p>“I serve your highness.”</p>
			<p>Before the gate Kmita’s men were holding two horses completely equipped: one was indeed of high breed, black as a raven, with a star on his forehead, and a white fetlock to a leg like a lance; he neighed slightly at sight of his master.</p>
			<p>“I guess that to be the one,” said Boguslav. “I do not know whether he is such a wonder as you say, but in truth he is a fine horse.”</p>
			<p>“Try him!” cried Kmita; “or no, I will mount him myself!”</p>
			<p>The soldiers gave Kmita the horse; he mounted, and began to ride around near the gate. Under the skilled rider the horse seemed doubly beautiful. His prominent eyes gained brightness as he moved at a trot; he seemed to blow forth inner fire through his nostrils, while the wind unfolded his mane. Pan Kmita described a circle, changed his gait; at last he rode straight on the prince, so that the nostrils of the horse were not a yard from his face, and cried,⁠—</p>
			<p>“Halt!”</p>
			<p>The horse stopped with his four feet resisting, and stood as if fixed to the ground.</p>
			<p>“What do you say?” asked Kmita.</p>
			<p>“The eyes and legs of a deer, the gait of a wolf, the nostrils of an elk, and the breast of a woman!” said Boguslav. “Here is all that is needed. Does he understand German command?”</p>
			<p>“Yes; for my horse-trainer Zend, who was a Courlander, taught him.”</p>
			<p>“And the beast is swift?”</p>
			<p>“The wind cannot come up with him; a Tartar cannot escape him.”</p>
			<p>“Your trainer must have been a good one, for I see that the horse is highly taught.”</p>
			<p>“Is he taught? Your highness will not believe. He goes so in the rank that when the line is moving at a trot, you may let the reins drop and he will not push one half of his nose beyond the line. If your highness will be pleased to try, and if in two furlongs he will push beyond the others half a head, then I will give him as a gift.”</p>
			<p>“That would be the greatest wonder, not to advance with dropped reins.”</p>
			<p>“It is wonderful and convenient, for both hands of the rider are free. More than once have I had a sabre in one hand and a pistol in the other, and the horse went alone.”</p>
			<p>“But if the rank turns?”</p>
			<p>“Then he will turn too without breaking the line.”</p>
			<p>“Impossible!” exclaimed the prince; “no horse will do that. I have seen in France horses of the king’s musketeers, greatly trained, of purpose not to spoil the court ceremonies, but still it was necessary to guide them with reins.”</p>
			<p>“The wit of man is in this horse. Let your highness try him yourself.”</p>
			<p>“Give him here!” said the prince, after a moment’s thought.</p>
			<p>Kmita held the horse till Boguslav mounted. He sprang lightly into the saddle, and began to pat the steed on his shining neck.</p>
			<p>“A wonderful thing,” said he; “the best horses shed their hair in the autumn, but this one is as if he had come out of water. In what direction shall we go?”</p>
			<p>“Let us move in a line, and if your highness permits, toward the forest. The road is even and broad, but in the direction of the town some wagon might come in the way.”</p>
			<p>“Let us ride toward the forest.”</p>
			<p>“Just two furlongs. Let your highness drop the reins and start on a gallop. Two men on each side, and I will ride a little behind.”</p>
			<p>“Take your places!” said the prince.</p>
			<p>The line was formed; they turned the horses’ heads from the town. The prince was in the middle.</p>
			<p>“Forward!” said he. “On a gallop from the start,⁠—march!”</p>
			<p>The line shot on, and after a certain time was moving like a whirlwind. A cloud of dust hid them from the eyes of the attendants and equerries, who, collecting in a crowd at the gate, looked with curiosity at the racing. The trained horses going at the highest speed, snorting from effort, had run already a furlong or more; and the prince’s steed, though not held by the reins, did not push forward an inch. They ran another furlong. Kmita turned, and seeing behind only a cloud of dust, through which the starosta’s house could barely be seen, and the people standing before it not at all, cried with a terrible voice,⁠—</p>
			<p>“Take him!”</p>
			<p>At this moment Biloüs and the gigantic Zavratynski seized both arms of the prince, and squeezed them till the bones cracked in their joints, and holding him in their iron fists, put spurs to their own horses.</p>
			<p>The prince’s horse in the middle held the line, neither pushing ahead nor holding back an inch. Astonishment, fright, the whirlwind beating in his face, deprived Prince Boguslav of speech for the first moment. He struggled once and a second time,⁠—without result, however, for pain from his twisted arms pierced him through.</p>
			<p>“What is this, ruffians? Know ye not who I am?” cried he at last.</p>
			<p>Thereupon Kmita pushed him with the barrel of the pistol between the shoulders. “Resistance is useless; it will only bring a bullet in your body!” cried he.</p>
			<p>“Traitor!” said the prince.</p>
			<p>“But who are you?” asked Kmita.</p>
			<p>And they galloped on farther.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
