<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h2>
			<p>For a number of subsequent days Pan Andrei was at Vodokty daily; and each time he returned more in love, and admired more and more his Olenka. He lauded her to the skies, too, before his companions, till on a certain day he said to them⁠—</p>
			<p>“My dear lambs, you will go today to beat with the forehead; then, as we have stipulated with the maiden, we will go to Mitruny to have a sleigh-ride through the forests and look at the third estate. She will entertain us there, and do you bear yourselves decently; for I would cut into hash the man who offended her in anything.”</p>
			<p>The cavaliers hurried willingly to prepare, and soon four sleighs were bearing the eager young men to Vodokty. Kmita sat in the first sleigh, which was highly ornamented and had the form of a silvery bear. This sleigh was drawn by three captured Kalmuk horses in variegated harness, in ribbons and peacock feathers, according to the Smolensk fashion, borrowed from more distant neighbors. A young fellow sitting in the neck of the bear drove the horses. Pan Andrei was dressed in a green velvet coat buttoned on golden cords and trimmed with sable, and wore a sable cap with a heron’s feather. He was gladsome, joyous, and spoke to Kokosinski sitting at his side⁠—</p>
			<p>“Listen, Kokoshko! I suppose we played tricks wild beyond measure on two evenings, and especially the first, when the skulls and the portraits suffered. But the case of the girls was still worse. The Devil always pushes forward that Zend, and then on whom does he pound out the punishment? On me. I am afraid that people will talk, for in this place my reputation is at stake.”</p>
			<p>“Hang yourself on your reputation; it is good for nothing else, just like ours.”</p>
			<p>“And who is to blame for that, if not you men? Remember, Kokoshko, they held me for a disturbing spirit in Orsha, and tongues were sharpened on me like knives on a whetstone.”</p>
			<p>“But who dragged Pan Tumgrat out in the frost with a horse; who cut up that official, who asked whether men walked on two feet in Orsha or on four? Who hacked the Vyzinskis, father and son? Who broke up the last provincial Diet?”</p>
			<p>“I broke up the Diet in Orsha, not somewhere else; that was a home affair. Pan Tumgrat forgave me when he was dying; and as to the others, speak not, for a duel may happen to the most innocent.”</p>
			<p>“I have not told all yet; I have not spoken of the trials in the army, of which two are still waiting for you.”</p>
			<p>“Not for me, but for you men; for I am to blame only for letting you rob the people. But no more of this! Shut your mouth, Kokoshko, and say nothing to Olenka about the duels, and especially nothing of that shooting at the portraits and of the girls. If it is told, I shall lay the blame on you. I have informed the servants and the girls that if a word is said, I will order belts taken out of their skins.”</p>
			<p>“Have yourself shod like a horse, Yendrus, if you are in such dread of your maiden. You were another man in Orsha. I see already that you will go in leading-strings, and there is no good in that. Some ancient philosopher says, ‘If you will not manage Kahna, Kahna will manage you.’ You have given yourself to be tied up in all things.”</p>
			<p>“You are a fool, Kokoshko! But as to Olenka you will stand on one foot and then on the other when you put eyes on her, for another woman with such proper intent is not to be found. What is good she will praise in a moment, but the bad she will blame without waiting; for she judges according to virtue, and has in herself a ready measure. The late under-chamberlain reared her in that way. Should you wish to boast of warlike daring before her, and say that you trampled on justice, you will soon be ashamed; for at once she will say, ‘An honorable citizen should not do that; it is against the country.’ She will speak so to you that it will be as if someone had slapped you on the face, and you’ll wonder that you did not know these things yourself. <i>Tfu!</i> shame! We have raised fearful disorder, and now must stand open-eyed before virtue and innocence. The worst was those girls⁠—”</p>
			<p>“By no means the worst. I have heard that in the villages there are girls of the petty nobility like blood and milk, and probably not stubborn at all.”</p>
			<p>“Who told you?” asked Kmita, quickly.</p>
			<p>“Who told me? Who, if not Zend? Yesterday while trying the roan steed he rode to Volmontovichi; he merely rode along the highway, but he saw many titmice, for they were coming from vespers. ‘I thought,’ said he, ‘that I should fly off the horse, they were so handsome and pretty.’ And whenever he looked at any one of them she showed her teeth directly. And no wonder! for all the grown men of the nobles have gone to Rossyeni, and it is dreary for the titmice alone.”</p>
			<p>Kmita punched his companion in the side with his fist. “Let us go, Kokoshko, some time in the evening⁠—pretend we are astray⁠—shall we?”</p>
			<p>“But your reputation?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, to the Devil! Shut your mouth! Go alone, if that is the way; but better drop the matter. It would not pass without talk, and I want to live in peace with the nobles here, for the late under-chamberlain made them Olenka’s guardians.”</p>
			<p>“You have spoken of that, but I would not believe it. How did he have such intimacy with homespuns?”</p>
			<p>“Because he went with them to war, and I heard of this in Orsha, when he said that there was honorable blood in those Lauda men. But to tell the truth, Kokoshko, it was an immediate wonder to me, for it is as if he had made them guards over me.”</p>
			<p>“You will yield to them and bow to your boots before dishcloths.”</p>
			<p>“First may the pestilence choke them! Be quiet, for I am angry! They will bow to me and serve me. Their quota is ready at every call.”</p>
			<p>“Someone else will command this quota. Zend says that there is a colonel here among them⁠—I forget his name⁠—Volodyovski or something? He led them at Shklov. They fought well, it appears, but were combed out there.”</p>
			<p>“I have heard of a Volodyovski, a famous warrior⁠—But here is Vodokty in sight.”</p>
			<p>“Hei, it is well for people in Jmud; for there is stern order. The old man must have been a born manager. And the house⁠—I see how it looks. The enemy brought fire here seldom, and the people could build.”</p>
			<p>“I think that she cannot have heard yet of that outburst in Lyubich,” said Kmita, as if to himself. Then he turned to his comrade: “My Kokoshko, I tell you, and do you repeat it to the others, that you must bear yourselves decently here; and if any man permits himself anything, as God is dear to me, I will cut him up like chopped straw.”</p>
			<p>“Well, they have saddled you!”</p>
			<p>“Saddled, saddled not, I will cut you up!”</p>
			<p>“Don’t look at my Kasia or I’ll cut you to pieces,” said Kokosinski, phlegmatically.</p>
			<p>“Fire out thy whip!” shouted Kmita to the driver.</p>
			<p>The youth standing in the neck of the silvery bear whirled his whip, and cracked it very adroitly; other drivers followed his example, and they drove with a rattling, quick motion, joyous as at a carnival.</p>
			<p>Stepping out of the sleighs, they came first to an antechamber as large as a granary, an unpainted room; thence Kmita conducted them to the dining-hall, ornamented as in Lyubich with skulls and antlers of slain beasts. Here they halted, looking carefully and with curiosity at the door of the adjoining room, by which Panna Aleksandra was to enter. Meanwhile, evidently keeping in mind Kmita’s warning, they spoke with one another in subdued tones, as in a church.</p>
			<p>“You are a fellow of speech,” whispered Uhlik to Kokosinski, “you will greet her for us all.”</p>
			<p>“I was arranging something to say on the road,” answered Kokosinski, “but I know not whether it will be smooth enough, for Yendrus interrupted my ideas.”</p>
			<p>“Let it be as it comes, if with spirit. But here she is!”</p>
			<p>Panna Aleksandra entered, halting a little on the threshold, as if in wonder at such a large company. Kmita himself stood for a while as if fixed to the floor in admiration of her beauty; for hitherto he had seen her only in the evening, and in the day she seemed still more beautiful. Her eyes had the color of star-thistles; the dark brows above them were in contrast to the forehead as ebony with white, and her yellow hair shone like a crown on the head of a queen. Not dropping her eyes, she had the self-possessed mien of a lady receiving guests in her own house, with clear face seeming still clearer from the black dress trimmed with ermine. Such a dignified and exalted lady the warriors had not seen; they were accustomed to women of another type. So they stood in a rank as if for the enrolling of a company, and shuffling their feet they also bowed together in a row; but Kmita pushed forward, and kissing the hand of the lady a number of times, said⁠—</p>
			<p>“See, my jewel, I have brought you fellow soldiers with whom I fought in the last war.”</p>
			<p>“It is for me no small honor,” answered Panna Billevich, “to receive in my house such worthy cavaliers, of whose virtue and excellent qualities I have heard from their commander, Pan Kmita.”</p>
			<p>When she had said this she took her skirt with the tips of her fingers, and raising it slightly, courtesied with unusual dignity. Kmita bit his lips, but at the same time he was flushed, since his maiden had spoken with such spirit.</p>
			<p>The worthy cavaliers continuing to shuffle their feet, all nudged at the same moment Pan Kokosinski: “Well, begin!”</p>
			<p>Kokosinski moved forward one step, cleared his throat, and began as follows: “Serene great mighty lady, under-chamberlain’s daughter⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Chief-hunter’s daughter,” corrected Kmita.</p>
			<p>“Serene great mighty lady, chief-hunter’s daughter, but to us right merciful benefactress,” repeated Kokosinski⁠—“pardon, your ladyship, if I have erred in the title⁠—”</p>
			<p>“A harmless mistake,” replied Panna Aleksandra, “and it lessens in no wise such an eloquent cavalier⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Serene great mighty lady, chief-hunter’s daughter, benefactress, and our right merciful lady, I know not what becomes me in the name of all Orsha to celebrate more⁠—the extraordinary beauty and virtue of your ladyship, our benefactress, or the unspeakable happiness of the captain and our fellow-soldier, Pan Kmita; for though I were to approach the clouds, though I were to reach the clouds themselves⁠—I say, the clouds⁠—”</p>
			<p>“But come down out of those clouds!” cried Kmita.</p>
			<p>With that the cavaliers burst into one enormous laugh; but all at once remembering the command of Kmita, they seized their mustaches with their hands.</p>
			<p>Kokosinski was confused in the highest degree. He grew purple, and said, “Do the greeting yourselves, pagans, since you confuse me.”</p>
			<p>Panna Aleksandra took again, with the tips of her fingers, her skirt. “I could not follow you gentlemen in eloquence,” said she, “but I know that I am unworthy of those homages which you give me in the name of all Orsha.”</p>
			<p>And again she made a courtesy with exceeding dignity, and it was somehow out of place for the Orsha roisterers in the presence of that courtly maiden. They strove to exhibit themselves as men of politeness, but it did not become them. Therefore they began to pull their mustaches, to mutter and handle their sabres, till Kmita said⁠—</p>
			<p>“We have come here as if in a carnival, with the thought to take you with us and drive to Mitruny through the forest, as was the arrangement yesterday. The snow-road is firm, and God has given frosty weather.”</p>
			<p>“I have already sent Aunt Kulvyets to Mitruny to prepare dinner. But now, gentlemen, wait just a little till I put on something warm.”</p>
			<p>Then she turned and went out.</p>
			<p>Kmita sprang to his comrades. “Well, my dear lambs, isn’t she a princess? Now, Kokosinski, you said that she had saddled me, and why were you as a little boy before her? Where have you seen her like?”</p>
			<p>“There was no call to interrupt me; though I do not deny that I did not expect to address such a person.”</p>
			<p>“The late under-chamberlain,” said Kmita, “lived with her most of the time in Kyedani, at the court of the prince <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i>, or lived with the Hleboviches; and there she acquired those high manners. But her beauty⁠—what of that? You cannot let your breath go yet.”</p>
			<p>“We have appeared as fools,” said Ranitski, in anger; “but the biggest fool was Kokosinski.”</p>
			<p>“Traitor! why punch me with your elbow? You should have appeared yourself, with your spotted mouth.”</p>
			<p>“Harmony, lambs, harmony!” said Kmita; “I will let you admire, but not wrangle.”</p>
			<p>“I would spring into the fire for her,” said Rekuts. “Hew me down, Yendrus, but I’ll not deny that.”</p>
			<p>Kmita did not think of cutting down; he was satisfied, twisted his mustache, and gazed on his comrades with triumph. Now Panna Aleksandra entered, wearing a marten-skin cap, under which her bright face appeared still brighter. They went out on the porch.</p>
			<p>“Then shall we ride in this sleigh?” asked the lady, pointing to the silvery bear. “I have not seen a more beautiful sleigh in my life.”</p>
			<p>“I know not who has used it hitherto, for it was captured. It suits me very well, for on my shield is a lady on a bear. There are other Kmitas who have banners on their shield, but they are descended from Filon Kmita of Charnobil; he was not of the same house from which the great Kmitas are descended.”</p>
			<p>“And when did you capture this bear sleigh?”</p>
			<p>“Lately, in this war. We poor exiles who have fallen away from fortune have only what war gives us in plunder. But as I serve that lady faithfully, she has rewarded me.”</p>
			<p>“May God grant a better; for war rewards one, but presses tears from the whole dear fatherland.”</p>
			<p>“God and the hetmans will change that.”</p>
			<p>Meanwhile Kmita wrapped Panna Aleksandra in the beautiful sleigh robe of white cloth lined with white wolfskin; then taking his own seat, he cried to the driver, “Move on!” and the horses sprang forward at a run.</p>
			<p>The cold wind struck their faces with its rush; they were silent, therefore, and nothing was heard save the wheezing of frozen snow under the runners, the snorting of the horses, their tramp, and the cry of the driver.</p>
			<p>At last Pan Andrei bent toward Olenka. “Is it pleasant for you?”</p>
			<p>“Pleasant,” answered she, raising her sleeve and holding it to her mouth to ward off the rush of air.</p>
			<p>The sleigh dashed on like a whirlwind. The day was bright, frosty; the snow sparkled as if someone were scattering sparks on it. From the white roofs of the cottages, which were like piles of snow, rosy smoke curled in high columns. Flocks of crows from among the leafless trees by the roadside flew before the sleighs with shrill cawing.</p>
			<p>About eighty rods from Vodokty they came out on a broad road into dark pinewoods which stood gloomy, hoary, and silent as if sleeping under the thick snow-bunches. The trees flitted before the eye, appeared to be fleeing to some place in the rear of the sleigh; but the sleigh flew on, every moment swiftly, more swiftly, as if the horses had wings. From such driving the head turns, and ecstasy seizes one; it seized Panna Aleksandra. She leaned back, closed her eyes, and yielded completely to the impetus. She felt a sweet powerlessness, and it seemed to her that that boyar of Orsha had taken her by violence: that he is rushing away like a whirlwind, and she growing weak has no strength to oppose or to cry⁠—and they are flying, flying each moment more swiftly. Olenka feels that arms are embracing her; then on her cheek as it were a hot burning stamp. Her eyes will not open, as if in a dream; and they fly, fly.</p>
			<p>An inquiring voice first roused the sleeping lady: “Do you love me?”</p>
			<p>She opened her eyes. “As my own soul.”</p>
			<p>“And I for life and death.”</p>
			<p>Again the sable cap of Kmita bent over the marten-skin cap of Olenka. She knew not herself which gave her more delight⁠—the kisses or the magic ride.</p>
			<p>And they flew farther, but always through pinewoods, through pinewoods. Trees fled to the rear in whole regiments. The snow was wheezing, the horses snorting; but the man and the maiden were happy.</p>
			<p>“I would ride to the end of the world in this way,” cried Kmita.</p>
			<p>“What are we doing? This is a sin!” whispered Olenka.</p>
			<p>“What sin? Let us commit it again.”</p>
			<p>“Impossible! Mitruny is not far.”</p>
			<p>“Far or near, ’tis all one!”</p>
			<p>And Kmita rose in the sleigh, stretched his arms upward, and began to shout as if in a full breast he could not find place for his joy: “Hei-ha! hei-ha!”</p>
			<p>“Hei-hop! hoop-ha!” answered the comrades from the sleighs behind.</p>
			<p>“Why do you shout so?” asked the lady.</p>
			<p>“Oh, so, from delight! And shout you as well!”</p>
			<p>“Hei-ha!” was heard the resonant, thin alto voice.</p>
			<p>“O thou, my queen! I fall at thy feet.”</p>
			<p>“The company will laugh.”</p>
			<p>After the ecstasy a noisy joyousness seized them, as wild as the driving was wild. Kmita began to sing⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>“Look thou, my girl! look through the door,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">To the rich fields!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Oh, knights from the pinewoods are coming, my mother,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">Oh, that’s my fate!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Look not, my daughter! cover thy eyes,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">With thy white hands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For thy heart will spring out of thy bosom</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i2">With them to the war.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>“Who taught you such lovely songs?” asked Panna Aleksandra.</p>
			<p>“War, Olenka. In the camp we sang them to one another to drive away sadness.”</p>
			<p>Further conversation was interrupted by a loud calling from the rear sleighs: “Stop! stop! Hei there⁠—stop!”</p>
			<p>Pan Andrei turned around in anger, wondering how it came to the heads of his comrades to call and stop him. He saw a few tens of steps from the sleigh a horseman approaching at full speed of the horse.</p>
			<p>“As God lives, that is my sergeant Soroka; what can have happened?” said Pan Andrei.</p>
			<p>That moment the sergeant coming up, reined his horse on his haunches, and began to speak with a panting voice: “Captain!⁠—”</p>
			<p>“What is the matter, Soroka?”</p>
			<p>“Upita is on fire; they are fighting!”</p>
			<p>“Jesus Mary!” screamed Olenka.</p>
			<p>“Have no fear!⁠—Who is fighting?”</p>
			<p>“The soldiers with the townspeople. There is a fire on the square! The townspeople are enraged, and they have sent to Ponyevyej for a garrison. But I galloped here to your grace. I can barely draw breath.”</p>
			<p>During this conversation the sleighs behind caught up; Kokosinski, Ranitski, Kulvyets-Hippocentaurus, Uhlik, Rekuts, and Zend, springing out on the snow, surrounded the speakers with a circle.</p>
			<p>“What is the matter?” asked Kmita.</p>
			<p>“The townspeople would not give supplies for horses or men, because there was no order for it; the soldiers began to take by force. We besieged the mayor and those who barricaded themselves in the square. Firing was begun, and we burned two houses; at present there is terrible violence, and ringing of bells⁠—”</p>
			<p>Kmita’s eyes gleamed with wrath.</p>
			<p>“We must go to the rescue!” shouted Kokosinski.</p>
			<p>“The rabble are oppressing the army!” cried Ranitski, whose whole face was covered at once with red, white, and dark spots. “Check, check! mighty lords!”</p>
			<p>Zend laughed exactly as a screech-owl hoots, till the horses were frightened; and Rekuts raised his eyes and piped, “Strike, whoso believes in God! smoke out the ruffians!”</p>
			<p>“Be silent!” roared Kmita, till the woods echoed, and Zend, who stood nearest, staggered like a drunken man. “There is no need of you there, no need of slashing! Sit all of you in two sleighs, leave me the third. Drive back to Lyubich; wait there unless I send for succor.”</p>
			<p>“How is that?” asked Ranitski, opposing.</p>
			<p>But Pan Andrei laid a hand on his throat, and his eyes gleamed more terribly. “Not a breath out of you!” said he, threateningly.</p>
			<p>They were silent; evidently they feared him, though usually on such familiar footing.</p>
			<p>“Go back, Olenka, to Vodokty,” said Kmita, “or go for your Aunt Kulvyets to Mitruny. Well, our party was not a success. But it will be quieter there soon; only a few heads will fly off. Be in good health and at rest; I shall be quick to return.”</p>
			<p>Having said this, he kissed her hand, and wrapped her in the wolfskin; then he took his seat in the other sleigh, and cried to the driver, “To Upita!”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
