<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>IX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-9" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h2>
			<p>These thoughts did not let Volodyovski sleep on the night following. For a number of days he was thinking continually of Panna Aleksandra, and saw that she had dropped deeply into his heart. Besides, the Lauda nobles wished to bring about a marriage between them. It is true that she had refused him without hesitation, but at that time she neither knew him nor had seen him. Now it was something quite different. He had wrested her in knightly fashion from the hands of a man of violence, had exposed himself to bullets and sabres, had captured her like a fortress. Whose is she, if not his? Can she refuse him anything, even her hand? Well, shall he not try? Perhaps affection has begun in her from gratitude, since it happens often in the world that the rescued lady gives straightway her hand to her rescuer. If she has not conceived an affection for him as yet, it behooves him all the more to exert himself in the matter.</p>
			<p>“But if she remembers and loves the other man still?”</p>
			<p>“It cannot be,” repeated Volodyovski to himself; “if she had not rejected him, he would not have taken her by force. She showed, it is true, uncommon kindness to him; but it is a woman’s work to take pity on the wounded, even if they are enemies. She is young, without guardianship; it is time for her to marry. It is clear that she has no vocation for the cloister, or she would have entered one already. There has been time enough. Men will annoy such a comely lady continually⁠—some for her fortune, others for her beauty, and still others for her high blood. Oh, a defence the reality of which she can see with her own eyes will be dear to her. It is time too for thee to settle down, my dear Michael!” said Volodyovski to himself. “Thou art young yet, but the years hurry swiftly. Thou wilt win not fortune in service, but rather more wounds in thy skin, and to thy giddy life will come an end.”</p>
			<p>Here through the memory of Pan Volodyovski passed a whole line of young ladies after whom he had sighed in his life. Among them were some very beautiful and of high blood, but one more charming and distinguished there was not. Besides, the people of these parts exalted that family and that lady, and from her eyes there looked such honesty that may God give no worse wife to the best man.</p>
			<p>Pan Volodyovski felt that a prize was meeting him which might not come a second time, and this the more since he had rendered the lady such uncommon service. “Why delay?” said he to himself. “What better can I wait for? I must try.”</p>
			<p>Pshaw! but war is at hand. His arm was well. It was a shame for a knight to go courting when his country was stretching forth its hands imploring deliverance. Pan Michael had the heart of an honest soldier; and though he had served almost from boyhood, though he had taken part in nearly all the wars of his time, he knew what he owed his country, and he dreamed not of rest.</p>
			<p>Precisely because he had served his country not for gain, reward, or praise, but from his soul, had he in that regard a clean conscience, he felt his worth, and that gave him solace. “Others were frolicking, but I was fighting,” thought he. “The Lord God will reward the little soldier, and will help him this time.”</p>
			<p>But he saw that soon there would be no time for courting; there was need to act promptly, and put everything on the hazard at once⁠—to make a proposal on the spot, and either marry after short bans or eat a watermelon.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-12" id="noteref-12" epub:type="noteref">12</a> “I have eaten more than one; I’ll eat another this time,” muttered Volodyovski, moving his yellow mustaches. “What harm will it do?”</p>
			<p>But there was one side to this sudden decision which did not please him. He put the question to himself if going with a visit so soon after saving the lady he would not be like an importunate creditor who wishes a debt to be paid with usury and as quickly as possible. Perhaps it will not be in knightly fashion? Nonsense! for what can gratitude be asked, if not for service? And if this haste does not please the heart of the lady, if she looks askance at him, why, he can say to her, “Gracious lady, I would have come courting one year, and gazed at you as if I were nearsighted; but I am a soldier, and the trumpets are sounding for battle!”</p>
			<p>“So I’ll go,” said Pan Volodyovski.</p>
			<p>But after a while another thought entered his head: if she says, “Go to war, noble soldier, and after the war you will visit me during one year and look at me like a nearsighted man, for I will not give in a moment my soul and my body to one whom I know not!”</p>
			<p>Then all will be lost! That it would be lost Pan Volodyovski felt perfectly; for leaving aside the lady whom in the interval some other man might marry, Volodyovski was not sure of his own constancy. Conscience declared that in him love was kindled like straw, but quenched as quickly.</p>
			<p>Then all will be lost! And then wander on farther, thou soldier, a vagrant from one camp to another, from battle to battle, with no roof in the world, with no living soul of thy kindred! Search the four corners of earth when the war will be over, not knowing a place for thy heart save the barracks!</p>
			<p>At last Volodyovski knew not what to do. It had become in a certain fashion narrow and stifling for him in the Patsuneli house; he took his cap therefore to go out on the road and enjoy the May sun. On the threshold he came upon one of Kmita’s men taken prisoner, who in the division of spoils had come to old Pakosh. The Cossack was warming himself in the sun and playing on a bandura.</p>
			<p>“What art thou doing here?” asked Volodyovski.</p>
			<p>“I am playing,” answered the Cossack, raising his thin face,</p>
			<p>“Whence art thou?” asked Volodyovski, glad to have some interruption to his thoughts.</p>
			<p>“From afar, from the Viahla.”</p>
			<p>“Why not run away like the rest of thy comrades? Oh, such kind of sons! The nobles spared your lives in Lyubich so as to have laborers, and your comrades all ran away as soon as the ropes were removed.”</p>
			<p>“I will not run away. I’ll die here like a dog.”</p>
			<p>“So it has pleased thee here?”</p>
			<p>“He runs away who feels better in the field; it is better for me here. I had my leg shot through, and the old man’s daughter here dressed it, and she spoke a kind word. Such a beauty I have not seen before with my eyes. Why should I go away?”</p>
			<p>“Which one pleased thee so?”</p>
			<p>“Maryska.”</p>
			<p>“And so thou wilt remain?”</p>
			<p>“If I die, they will carry me out; if not, I will remain.”</p>
			<p>“Dost thou think to earn Pakosh’s daughter?”</p>
			<p>“I know not.”</p>
			<p>“He would give death to such a poor fellow before he would his daughter.”</p>
			<p>“I have gold pieces buried in the woods,” said the Cossack⁠—“two purses.”</p>
			<p>“From robbery?”</p>
			<p>“From robbery.”</p>
			<p>“Even if thou hadst a pot of gold, thou art a peasant and Pakosh is a noble.”</p>
			<p>“I am an attendant boyar.”</p>
			<p>“If thou art an attendant boyar, thou art worse than a peasant, for thou’rt a traitor. How couldst thou serve the enemy?”</p>
			<p>“I did not serve the enemy.”</p>
			<p>“And where did Pan Kmita find thee and thy comrades?”</p>
			<p>“On the road. I served with the full hetman; but the squadron went to pieces, for we had nothing to eat. I had no reason to go home, for my house was burned. Others went to rob on the road, and I went with them.”</p>
			<p>Volodyovski wondered greatly, for hitherto he had thought that Kmita had attacked Olenka with forces obtained from the enemy.</p>
			<p>“So Pan Kmita did not get thee from Trubetskoi?”</p>
			<p>“Most of the other men had served before with Trubetskoi and Hovanski, but they had run away too and taken to the road.”</p>
			<p>“Why did you go with Pan Kmita?”</p>
			<p>“Because he is a splendid ataman. We were told that when he called on anyone to go with him, thalers as it were flowed out of a bag, to that man. That’s why we went. Well, God did not give us good luck!”</p>
			<p>Volodyovski began to rack his head, and to think that they had blackened Kmita too much; then he looked at the pale attendant boyar and again racked his head.</p>
			<p>“And so thou art in love with her?”</p>
			<p>“Oi, so much!”</p>
			<p>Volodyovski walked away, and while going he thought: “That is a resolute man. He did not break his head; he fell in love and remained. Such men are best. If he is really an attendant boyar, he is of the same rank as the village nobles. When he digs up his gold pieces, perhaps the old man will give him Maryska. And why? Because he did not go to drumming with his fingers, but made up his mind that he would get her. I’ll make up my mind too.”</p>
			<p>Thus meditating, Volodyovski walked along the road in the sunshine. Sometimes he would stop, fix his eyes on the ground or raise them to the sky, then again go farther, till all at once he saw a flock of wild ducks flying through the air. He began to soothsay whether he should go or not. It came out that he was to go.</p>
			<p>“I will go; it cannot be otherwise.”</p>
			<p>When he had said this he turned toward the house; but on the way he went once more to the stable, before which his two servants were playing dice.</p>
			<p>“Syruts, is Basior’s mane plaited?”</p>
			<p>“Plaited, Colonel!”</p>
			<p>Volodyovski went into the stable. Basior neighed at him from the manger; the knight approached the horse, patted him on the side, and then began to count the braids on his neck. “Go⁠—not go⁠—go.” Again the soothsaying came out favorably.</p>
			<p>“Saddle the horse and dress decently,” commanded Volodyovski.</p>
			<p>Then he went to the house quickly, and began to dress. He put on high cavalry boots, yellow, with gilded spurs, and a new red uniform, besides a rapier with steel scabbard, the hilt ornamented with gold; in addition a half breastplate of bright steel covering only the upper part of the breast near the neck. He had also a lynx-skin cap with a beautiful heron feather; but since that was worn only with a Polish dress, he left it in the trunk, put on a Swedish helmet with a vizor, and went out before the porch.</p>
			<p>“Where is your grace going?” asked old Pakosh, who was sitting on the railing.</p>
			<p>“Where am I going? It is proper for me to go and inquire after the health of your lady; if not, she might think me rude.”</p>
			<p>“From your grace there is a blaze like fire. Every bulfinch is a fool in comparison! Unless the lady is without eyes, she will fall in love in a minute.”</p>
			<p>Just then the two youngest daughters of Pakosh hurried up on their way home from the forenoon milking, each with a pail of milk. When they saw Volodyovski they stood as if fixed to the earth from wonder.</p>
			<p>“Is it a king or not?” asked Zonia.</p>
			<p>“Your grace is like one going to a wedding,” added Marysia.</p>
			<p>“Maybe there will be a wedding,” laughed old Pakosh, “for he is going to see our lady.”</p>
			<p>Before the old man had stopped speaking the full pail dropped from the hand of Marysia, and a stream of milk flowed along till it reached the feet of Volodyovski.</p>
			<p>“Pay attention to what you are holding!” said Pakosh, angrily. “Giddy thing!”</p>
			<p>Marysia said nothing; she raised the pail and walked off in silence.</p>
			<p>Volodyovski mounted his horse; his two servants followed him, riding abreast, and the three moved on toward Vodokty. The day was beautiful. The May sun played on the breastplate and helmet of the colonel, so that when at a distance he was gleaming among the willows it seemed that another sun was pushing along the road.</p>
			<p>“I am curious to know whether I shall come back with a ring or a melon?” said the knight to himself.</p>
			<p>“What is your grace saying?” asked Syruts.</p>
			<p>“Thou art a blockhead!”</p>
			<p>Syruts reined in his horse, and Volodyovski continued: “The whole luck of the matter is that it is not the first time!”</p>
			<p>This idea gave him uncommon comfort.</p>
			<p>When he arrived at Vodokty, Panna Aleksandra did not recognize him at the first moment, and he had to repeat his name. She greeted him heartily, but ceremoniously and with a certain constraint; but he presented himself befittingly⁠—for though a soldier, not a courtier, he had still lived long at great houses, had been among people. He bowed to her therefore with great respect, and placing his hand on his heart spoke as follows:⁠—</p>
			<p>“I have come to inquire about the health of my lady benefactress, whether some pain has not come from the fright. I ought to have done this the day after, but I did not wish to give annoyance.”</p>
			<p>“It is very kind of you to keep me in mind after having saved me from such straits. Sit down, for you are a welcome guest.”</p>
			<p>“My lady,” replied Volodyovski, “had I forgotten you I should not have deserved the favor which God sent when he permitted me to give aid to so worthy a person.”</p>
			<p>“No, I ought to thank first God, and then you.”</p>
			<p>“Then let us both thank; for I implore nothing else than this⁠—that he grant me to defend you as often as need comes.”</p>
			<p>Pan Michael now moved his waxed mustaches, which curled up higher than his nose, for he was satisfied with himself for having gone straight in <i xml:lang="la">medias res</i> and placed his sentiments, so to speak, on the table. She sat embarrassed and silent, but beautiful as a spring day. A slight flush came on her cheeks, and she covered her eyes with the long lashes from which shadows fell on the pupils.</p>
			<p>“That confusion is a good sign,” thought Volodyovski; and coughing he proceeded: “You know, I suppose, that I led the Lauda men after your grandfather?”</p>
			<p>“I know,” answered Olenka. “My late grandfather was unable to make the last campaign, but he was wonderfully glad when he heard whom the <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i> of Vilna had appointed to the command, and said that he knew you by reputation as a splendid soldier.”</p>
			<p>“Did he say that?”</p>
			<p>“I myself heard how he praised you to the skies, and how the Lauda men did the same after the campaign.”</p>
			<p>“I am a simple soldier, not worthy of being exalted to the skies, nor above other men. Still I rejoice that I am not quite a stranger, for you do not think now that an unknown and uncertain guest has fallen with the last rain from the clouds. Many people are wandering about who call themselves persons of high family and say they are in office, and God knows who they are; perhaps often they are not even nobles.”</p>
			<p>Pan Volodyovski gave the conversation this turn with the intent to speak of himself and of what manner of man he was. Olenka answered at once⁠—</p>
			<p>“No one would think that of you, for there are nobles of the same name in Lithuania.”</p>
			<p>“But they have the seal Ossorya, while I am a Korchak Volodyovski and we take our origin from Hungary from a certain noble, Atylla, who while pursued by his enemies made a vow to the Most Holy Lady that he would turn from Paganism to the Catholic faith if he should escape with his life. He kept this vow after he had crossed three rivers in safety⁠—the same rivers that we bear on our shield.”</p>
			<p>“Then your family is not from those parts?”</p>
			<p>“No, my lady, I am from the Ukraine of the Russian Volodyovskis, and to this time I own villages there which the enemy have occupied; but I serve in the army from youth, thinking less of land than of the harm inflicted on our country by strangers. I have served from the earliest years with the <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i> of Rus, our not sufficiently lamented Prince Yeremi, with whom I have been in all his wars. I was at Mahnovka and at Konstantinoff; I endured the hunger of Zbaraj, and after Berestechko our gracious lord the king pressed my head. God is my witness that I have not come here to praise myself, but desire that you might know, my lady, that I am no hanger-on, whose work is in shouting and who spares his own blood, but that my life has been passed in honorable service in which some little fame was won, and my conscience stained in nothing, so God be my aid! And to this worthy people can give testimony.”</p>
			<p>“Would that all were like you!” sighed Olenka.</p>
			<p>“Surely you have now in mind that man of violence who dared to raise his godless hand against you.”</p>
			<p>Panna Aleksandra fixed her eyes on the floor, and said not a word.</p>
			<p>“He has received pay for his deeds,” continued Volodyovski, “though it is said that he will recover, still he will not escape punishment. All honorable people condemn him, and even too much; for they say that he had relations with the enemy so as to obtain reinforcements⁠—which is untrue, for those men with whom he attacked you did not come from the enemy, but were collected on the highway.”</p>
			<p>“How do you know that?” asked the lady, raising her blue eyes to Volodyovski.</p>
			<p>“From the Cossacks themselves. He is a wonderful man, that Kmita; for when I accused him of treason before the duel he made no denial, though I accused him unjustly. It is clear that there is a devilish pride in him.”</p>
			<p>“And have you said everywhere that he is not a traitor?”</p>
			<p>“I have not, for I did not know that he was not a traitor; but now I will say so. It is wrong to cast such a calumny even on our own greatest enemy.”</p>
			<p>Panna Aleksandra’s eyes rested a second time on the little knight with an expression of sympathy and gratitude. “You are so honorable a man that your equal is rare.”</p>
			<p>Volodyovski fell to twitching his mustaches time after time with contentment. “To business, Michael dear!” said he, mentally. Then aloud to the lady: “I will say more: I blame Pan Kmita’s method, but I do not wonder that he tried to obtain you, my lady, in whose service Venus herself might act as a maid. Despair urged him on to an evil deed, and will surely urge him a second time, should opportunity offer. How will you remain alone, with such beauty and without protection? There are more men like Kmita in the world; you will rouse more such ardors, and will expose your honor to fresh perils. God sent me favor that I was able to free you, but now the trumpets of Gradivus call me. Who will watch over you? My gracious lady, they accuse soldiers of fickleness, but unjustly. Neither is my heart of rock, and it cannot remain indifferent to so many excellent charms.”</p>
			<p>Here Volodyovski fell on both knees before Olenka. “My gracious lady,” said he, while kneeling, “I inherited the command after your grandfather; let me inherit the granddaughter too. Give me guardianship over you; let me enjoy the bliss of mutual affection. Take me as a perpetual protection, and you will be at rest and free from care, for though I go to the war my name itself will defend you.”</p>
			<p>The lady sprang from the chair and heard Pan Volodyovski with astonishment; but he still spoke on:⁠—</p>
			<p>“I am a poor soldier, but a noble, and a man of honor. I swear to you that on my shield and on my conscience not the slightest stain can be found. I am at fault perhaps in this haste; but understand too that I am called by the country, which will not yield even for you. Will you not comfort me⁠—will you not give me solace, will you not say a kind word?”</p>
			<p>“You ask the impossible. As God lives, that cannot be!” answered Olenka, with fright.</p>
			<p>“It depends on your will.”</p>
			<p>“For that reason I say no to you promptly.” Here she frowned. “Worthy sir, I am indebted to you much, I do not deny it. Ask what you like, I am ready to give everything except my hand.”</p>
			<p>Pan Volodyovski rose. “Then you do not wish me, my lady? Is that true?”</p>
			<p>“I cannot.”</p>
			<p>“And that is your last word?”</p>
			<p>“The last and irrevocable word.”</p>
			<p>“Perhaps the haste only has displeased you. Give me some hope.”</p>
			<p>“I cannot, I cannot.”</p>
			<p>“Then there is no success for me here, as elsewhere there was none. My worthy lady, offer not pay for services, I have not come for that; and if I ask your hand it is not as pay, but from your own goodwill. Were you to say that you give it because you must, I would not take it. Where there is no freedom there is no happiness. You have disdained me. God grant that a worse do not meet you. I go from this house as I entered, save this that I shall not come here again. I am accounted here as nobody. Well, let it be so. Be happy even with that very Kmita, for perhaps you are angry because I placed a sabre between you. If he seems better to you, then in truth you are not for me.”</p>
			<p>Olenka seized her temples with her hands, and repeated a number of times: “O God! O God! O God!”</p>
			<p>But that pain of hers made no impression on Volodyovski, who, when he had bowed, went out angry and wrathful; then he mounted at once and rode off.</p>
			<p>“A foot of mine shall never stand there again!” said he, aloud.</p>
			<p>His attendant Syruts riding behind pushed up at once. “What does your grace say?”</p>
			<p>“Blockhead!” answered Volodyovski.</p>
			<p>“You told me that when we were coming hither.”</p>
			<p>Silence followed; then Volodyovski began to mutter again: “Ah, I was entertained there with ingratitude, paid for affection with contempt. It will come to me surely to serve in the cavalry till death; that is fated. Such a devil of a lot fell to me⁠—every move a refusal! There is no justice on earth. What did she find against me?”</p>
			<p>Here Pan Michael frowned, and began to work mightily with his brain; all at once he slapped his leg with his hand. “I know now,” shouted he; “she loves that fellow yet⁠—it cannot be otherwise.”</p>
			<p>But this idea did not clear his face. “So much the worse for me,” thought he, after a while; “for if she loves him yet, she will not stop loving him. He has already done his worst. He may go to war, win glory, repair his reputation. And it is not right to hinder him; he should rather be aided, for that is a service to the country. He is a good soldier, ’tis true. But how did he fascinate her so? Who can tell? Some have such fortune that if one of them looks on a woman she is ready to follow him into fire. If a man only knew how this is done or could get some captive spirit, perhaps he might effect something. Merit has no weight with a fair head. Pan Zagloba said wisely that a fox and a woman are the most treacherous creatures alive. But I grieve that all is lost. Oh, she is a terribly beautiful woman, and honorable and virtuous, as they say; ambitious as the devil⁠—that’s evident. Who knows that she will marry him though she loves him, for he has offended and disappointed her sorely. He might have won her in peace, but he chose to be lawless. She is willing to resign everything⁠—marriage and children. It is grievous for me, but maybe it is worse for her, poor thing!”</p>
			<p>Here Volodyovski fell into a fit of tenderness over the fate of Olenka, and began to rack his brain and smack his lips. At last he said⁠—</p>
			<p>“May God aid her! I have no ill feeling against her! It is not the first refusal for me, but for her it is the first suffering. The poor woman can scarcely recover now from sorrows. I have put out her eyes with this Kmita, and besides have given her gall to drink. It was not right to do that, and I must repair the wrong. I wish bullets had struck me, for I have acted rudely. I will write a letter asking forgiveness, and then help her in what way I can.”</p>
			<p>Further thoughts concerning Pan Kmita were interrupted by the attendant Syruts, who riding forward again said: “Pardon, but over there on the hill is Pan Kharlamp riding with someone else.”</p>
			<p>“Where?”</p>
			<p>“Over there!”</p>
			<p>“It is true that two horsemen are visible, but Pan Kharlamp remained with the prince <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i> of Vilna. How dost thou know him so far away?”</p>
			<p>“By his cream-colored horse. The whole array knows that horse anywhere.”</p>
			<p>“As true as I live, there is a cream-colored horse in view, but it may be some other man’s horse.”</p>
			<p>“When I recognize the gait, it is surely Pan Kharlamp.”</p>
			<p>They spurred on; the other horsemen did the same, and soon Volodyovski saw that Pan Kharlamp was in fact approaching.</p>
			<p>Pan Kharlamp was the lieutenant of a light-horse squadron in the Lithuanian quota. Pan Volodyovski’s acquaintance of long standing, an old soldier and a good one. Once he and the little knight had quarrelled fiercely, but afterward while serving together and campaigning they acquired a love for each other. Volodyovski sprang forward quickly, and opening his arms cried⁠—</p>
			<p>“How do you prosper, O Great-nose? Whence do you come?”</p>
			<p>The officer⁠—who in truth deserved the nickname of Great-nose, for he had a mighty nose⁠—fell into the embraces of the colonel, and greeted him joyously; then after he had recovered his breath, he said, “I have come to you with a commission and money.”</p>
			<p>“But from whom?”</p>
			<p>“From the prince <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i> of Vilna, our hetman. He sends you a commission to begin a levy at once, and another commission to Pan Kmita, who must be in this neighborhood.”</p>
			<p>“To Pan Kmita also? How shall we both make a levy in one neighborhood?”</p>
			<p>“He is to go to Troki, and you to remain in these parts.”</p>
			<p>“How did you know where to look for me?”</p>
			<p>“The hetman himself inquired carefully till the people from this place who have remained near him told where to find you. I came with sure information. You are in great and continual favor there. I have heard the prince himself say that he had not hoped to inherit anything from Prince Yeremi, but still he did inherit the greatest of knights.”</p>
			<p>“May God grant him to inherit the military success of Yeremi! It is a great honor for me to conduct a levy. I will set about it at once. There is no lack of warlike people here, if there was only something with which to give them an outfit. Have you brought much money?”</p>
			<p>“You will count it at Patsuneli.”</p>
			<p>“So you have been there already? But be careful; for there are shapely girls in Patsuneli, like poppies in a garden.”</p>
			<p>“Ah, that is why stopping there pleased you! But wait, I have a private letter from the hetman to you.”</p>
			<p>“Then give it.”</p>
			<p>Kharlamp drew forth a letter with the small seal of the Radzivills. Volodyovski opened it and began to read:⁠—</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
				<p><b epub:type="z3998:salutation">Worthy <span epub:type="z3998:recipient">Colonel Pan Volodyovski</span></b>⁠—Knowing your sincere wish to serve the country, I send you a commission to make a levy, and not as is usually done, but with great haste, for <i xml:lang="la">periculum in mora</i> (there is danger in delay). If you wish to give us joy, then let the squadron be mustered and ready for the campaign by the end of <time datetime="1655-07">July</time>, or the middle of <time datetime="1655-08">August</time> at the latest. We are anxious to know how you can find good horses, especially since we send money sparingly, for more we could not hammer from the under-treasurer, who after his old fashion is unfriendly to us. Give one half of this money to Pan Kmita, for whom Pan Kharlamp has also a commission. We hope that he will serve us zealously. But tidings have come to our ears of his violence in Upita, therefore it is better for you to take the letter directed to him from Kharlamp, and discover yourself whether to deliver it to him or not. Should you consider the accusations against him too great, and creating infamy, then do not give it, for we are afraid lest our enemies⁠—such as the under-treasurer, and the <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i> of Vityebsk⁠—might raise outcries against us because we commit such functions to unworthy persons. But if you give the letter after having found that there is nothing important, let Pan Kmita endeavor to wipe away his faults by the greatest exertion in service, and in no case to appear in the courts, for he belongs to our hetman’s jurisdiction⁠—we and no one else will judge him. Pay attention to our charge at once, in view of the confidence which we have in your judgment and faithful service.</p>
				<footer epub:type="z3998:sender" role="presentation">
					<p epub:type="z3998:signature">Yanush Radzivill,</p>
					<p>Prince in Birji and Dubinki, <i xml:lang="sla">Voevoda</i> of Vilna.</p>
				</footer>
			</blockquote>
			<p>“The hetman is terribly anxious about horses for you,” said Kharlamp, when the little knight had finished reading.</p>
			<p>“It will surely be difficult in the matter of horses,” answered Volodyovski. “A great number of the small nobility here will rally at the first summons, but they have only wretched little Jmud ponies, not very capable of service. For a good campaign it would be needful to give them all fresh horses.”</p>
			<p>“Those are good horses; I know them of old, wonderfully enduring and active.”</p>
			<p>“Bah!” responded Volodyovski, “but small, and the men here are large. If they should form in line on such horses, you would think them a squadron mounted on dogs. There is where the rub is. I will work with zeal, for I am in haste myself. Leave Kmita’s commission with me, as the hetman commands; I will give it to him. It has come just in season.”</p>
			<p>“But why?”</p>
			<p>“For he has acted here in Tartar fashion and taken a lady captive. There are as many lawsuits and questions hanging over him as he has hairs on his head. It is not a week since I had a sabre-duel with him.”</p>
			<p>“<i>Ai!</i>” cried Kharlamp. “If you had a sabre-duel with him, he is in bed at this moment.”</p>
			<p>“But he is better already. In a week or two he will be well. What is to be heard <i xml:lang="la">de publicis</i>?”</p>
			<p>“Evil in the old fashion. The under-treasurer, Pan Gosyevski, the full hetman, is ever quarrelling with the prince; and as the hetmans do not agree, affairs do not move in harmony. Still we have improved a little, and I think that if we had concord we might manage the enemy. God will permit us yet to ride on their necks to their own land. Gosyevski is to blame for all.”</p>
			<p>“But others say it is specially the grand hetman, Prince Radzivill.”</p>
			<p>“They are traitors. The <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i> of Vityebsk talks that way, for he and the under-treasurer are cronies this long time.”</p>
			<p>“The <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i> of Vityebsk is a worthy citizen.”</p>
			<p>“Are you on the side of Sapyeha against the Radzivills?”</p>
			<p>“I am on the side of the country, on whose side all should be. In this is the evil⁠—that even soldiers are divided into parties, instead of fighting. That Sapyeha is a worthy citizen, I would say in the presence of the prince himself, even though I serve under him.”</p>
			<p>“Good people have striven to bring about harmony, but with no result,” said Kharlamp. “There is a terrible movement of messengers from the king to our prince. They say that something is hatching. We expected with the visit of the king a call of the general militia; it has not come! They say that it may be necessary in some places.”</p>
			<p>“In the Ukraine, for instance.”</p>
			<p>“I know. But once Lieutenant Brohvich told what he heard with his own ears. Tyzenhauz came from the king to our hetman, and when they had shut themselves in they talked a long time about something which Brohvich could not overhear; but when they came out, with his own ears he heard the hetman say, ‘From this a new war may come.’ We racked our heads greatly to find what this could mean.”</p>
			<p>“Surely he was mistaken. With whom could there be a new war? The emperor is more friendly to us now than to our enemies, since it is proper for him to take the side of a civilized people. With the Swedes the truce is not yet at an end, and will not be for six years; the Tartars are helping us in the Ukraine, which they would not do without the will of Turkey.”</p>
			<p>“Well, we could not get at anything.”</p>
			<p>“For there was nothing. But, praise God, I have fresh work; I began to yearn for war.”</p>
			<p>“Do you wish to carry the commission yourself to Kmita?”</p>
			<p>“I do, because, as I have told you, the hetman has so ordered. It is proper for me to visit Kmita now according to knightly custom, and having the commission I shall have a still better chance to talk with him. Whether I give the commission is another thing; I think that I shall, for it is left to my discretion.”</p>
			<p>“That suits me; I am in such haste for the road. I have a third commission to Pan Stankyevich. Next I am commanded to go to Kyedani, to remove the cannon which are there; then to inspect Birji and see if everything is ready for defence.”</p>
			<p>“And to Birji too?”</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>“That is a wonder to me. The enemy have won no new victories, and it is far for them to go to Birji on the boundary of Courland. And since, as I see, new squadrons are being formed, there will be men to defend even those parts which have fallen under the power of the enemy. The Courlanders do not think of war with us. They are good soldiers, but few; and Radzivill might put the breath out of them with one hand.”</p>
			<p>“I wonder too,” answered Kharlamp, “all the more that haste is enjoined on me, and instructions given that if I find anything out of order I am to inform quickly Prince Boguslav Radzivill, who is to send Peterson the engineer.”</p>
			<p>“What can this mean? I hope ’tis no question of domestic war. May God preserve us from that! But when Prince Boguslav touches an affair the devil will come of the amusement.”</p>
			<p>“Say nothing against him; he is a valiant man.”</p>
			<p>“I say nothing against his valor, but there is more of the German or Frenchman in him than the Pole. And of the Commonwealth he never thinks; his only thought is how to raise the house of Radzivill to the highest point and lower all others. He is the man who rouses pride in the <i xml:lang="sla">voevoda</i> of Vilna, our hetman, who of himself has no lack of it; and those quarrels with Sapyeha and Gosyevski are the tree and the fruit of Prince Boguslav’s planting.”</p>
			<p>“I see that you are a great statesman. You should marry, Michael dear, as soon as possible, so that such wisdom is not lost.”</p>
			<p>Volodyovski looked very attentively at his comrade. “Marry⁠—why is that?”</p>
			<p>“Maybe you are going courting, for I see that you are dressed as on parade.”</p>
			<p>“Give us peace!”</p>
			<p>“Oh, own up!”</p>
			<p>“Let each man eat his own melons, not inquire about those of other men. You too have eaten more than one. It is just the time now to think of marriage when we have a levy on our hands!”</p>
			<p>“Will you be ready in <time datetime="1655-07">July</time>?”</p>
			<p>“At the end of <time datetime="1655-07">July</time>, even if I have to dig horses out of the ground. Thank God that this task has come, or melancholy would have devoured me.”</p>
			<p>So tidings from the hetman and the prospect of heavy work gave great consolation to Pan Michael; and before he reached Patsuneli, he had scarcely a thought of the rebuff which had met him an hour before. News of the commission flew quickly through the whole village. The nobles came straightway to inquire if the news was true; and when Volodyovski confirmed it, his words made a great impression. The readiness was universal, though some were troubled because they would have to march at the end of <time datetime="1655-07">July</time> before harvest. Volodyovski sent messengers to other neighborhoods⁠—to Upita, and to the most considerable noble houses. In the evening a number of Butryms, Stakyans, and Domasheviches came.</p>
			<p>They began to incite one another, show greater readiness, threaten the enemy, and promise victory to themselves. The Butryms alone were silent; but that was not taken ill, for it was known that they would rise as one man. Next day it was as noisy in all the villages as in beehives. People talked no more of Pan Kmita and Panna Aleksandra, but of the future campaign. Volodyovski also forgave Olenka sincerely the refusal, comforting himself meanwhile in his heart that that was not the last one, as the love was not the last. At the same time he pondered somewhat on what he had to do with the letter to Kmita.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
