<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>LXXXVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-86" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">LXXXVI</h2>

<p class="normal">The despair of the sword-bearer was so great that Olenka had to comfort
him, and give assurance that the money was not to be looked on as lost,
for the letter itself would serve as a note; and Radzivill, the master
of so many estates in Lithuania and Russia, had something from which to
recover.</p>

<p class="normal">But since it was difficult to foresee what might still meet them,
especially if Boguslav returned to Taurogi victorious, they began to
think of flight the more eagerly.</p>

<p class="normal">Olenka advised to defer everything till Kettling's recovery; for Braun
was a gloomy and surly old soldier, carrying out commands blindly, and
it was impossible to influence him.</p>

<p class="normal">As to Kettling, the lady knew well that he had wounded himself to
remain in Taurogi; hence her deep faith that he would do everything to
aid her. It is true that conscience disturbed her incessantly with the
question whether for self-safety she had the right to sacrifice the
career, and perhaps the life, of another; but the terrors hanging over
her in Taurogi were so dreadful that they surpassed a hundredfold the
dangers to which Kettling could be exposed.</p>

<p class="normal">Kettling, as an excellent officer, might find service, and a more noble
service, elsewhere, and with it powerful protectors, such as the king.
Pan Sapyeha, or Pan Charnyetski; and he would, besides, serve a just
cause, and would find a career grateful to that country which had
received him as an exile. Death threatened him only in case he fell
into Boguslav's hands; but Boguslav did not command yet the whole
Commonwealth.</p>

<p class="normal">Olenka ceased to hesitate; and when the health of the young officer had
improved, she sent for him.</p>

<p class="normal">Kettling stood before her, pale, emaciated, without a drop of blood in
his face, but always full of respect, homage, and submission. At sight
of him tears came to Olenka's eyes; for he was the only friendly soul
in Taurogi, and at the same time so thin and suffering that when Olenka
asked how his health was, he answered,&mdash;</p>

<p class="normal">&quot;Alas, my lady, health is returning, and it would be so pleasant to
die.&quot;</p>

<p class="normal">&quot;You should leave this service,&quot; said she, looking at him with
sympathy; &quot;for such an honorable man needs assurance that he is serving
a just cause and a worthy master.&quot;</p>

<p class="normal">&quot;Alas!&quot; repeated the officer.</p>

<p class="normal">&quot;When will your service end?&quot;</p>

<p class="normal">&quot;In half a year.&quot;</p>

<p class="normal">Olenka was silent awhile; then she raised her wonderful eyes, which at
that moment had ceased to be stern, and said,&mdash;</p>

<p class="normal">&quot;Listen to me. I will speak to you as to a brother, as to a sincere
confidant. You can, and you should resign.&quot;</p>

<p class="normal">When she had said this, she confessed to him everything,&mdash;both their
plans of escape, and that she relied on his assistance. She represented
to him that he could find service everywhere, and a service as good as
was his spirit, and honorable as knightly honor could obtain. At last
she finished with the following words:&mdash;</p>

<p class="normal">&quot;I shall be grateful to you till death. I wish to take refuge under the
guardianship of God, and to make a vow to the Lord in a cloister. But
wherever you may be, far or near, in war or in peace, I shall pray for
you. I will implore God to give peace and happiness to my brother and
benefactor; for I can give him nothing save gratitude and prayer.&quot;</p>

<p class="normal">Here her voice trembled; and the officer listened to her words, growing
pale as a kerchief. At last he knelt, put both hands to his forehead,
and said, in a voice like a groan,&mdash;</p>

<p class="normal">&quot;I cannot, my lady; I cannot!&quot;</p>

<p class="normal">&quot;Do you refuse me?&quot; asked Olenka, with amazement.</p>

<p class="normal">&quot;O great, merciful God!&quot; said he. &quot;From childhood no lie has risen on
my lips, no unjust deed has ever stained me. While still a youth, I
defended with this weak hand my king and country. Why, Lord, dost Thou
punish me so grievously, and send on me suffering for which, as Thou
seest, strength fails me?&quot; Here he turned to Olenka: &quot;My lady, you do
not know what an order is for a soldier. In obedience is not only his
duty, but his honor and reputation. An oath binds me, my lady,&mdash;and
more than an oath, the word of a knight,&mdash;that I shall not throw up my
service before the time, and that I will fulfil what belongs to it
blindly. I am a soldier and a noble; and, so help me God, never in my
life will I follow the example of those who betray honor and service.
And I will not break my word, even at your command, at your prayer,
though I say this in suffering and pain. If, having an order not to let
any one out of Taurogi, I were on guard at the gate, and if you
yourself wished to pass against the order, you would pass only over my
corpse. You did not know me, my lady; and you were mistaken in me. But
have pity on me; understand that I cannot aid you to escape. I ought
not to hear of such a thing. The order is express, for Braun and the
five remaining officers of us here have received it. My God, my God! if
I had foreseen such an order, I should have preferred to go on the
campaign. I shall not convince you; you will not believe me. And still
God sees&mdash;let God judge me after death whether it is true&mdash;that I would
give my life without hesitation. But my honor&mdash;I cannot, I cannot!&quot;</p>

<p class="normal">Then Kettling wrung his hands, was silent from exhaustion, and began to
breathe quickly.</p>

<p class="normal">Olenka had not recovered yet from her amazement. She had not time to
pause, or estimate properly that spirit, exceptional in its nobleness.
She felt only that the last plank of salvation was slipping from her
hands, the only means of escape from hated captivity was failing her.
But still she tried to resist.</p>

<p class="normal">&quot;I am,&quot; said she, after a while, &quot;the granddaughter and the daughter of
a soldier. My grandfather and father also valued honor above life; but,
precisely for that reason, they would not let themselves be used
blindly for every service.&quot;</p>

<p class="normal">Kettling drew, with trembling hand, from his coat a letter, gave it to
Olenka, and said,&mdash;</p>

<p class="normal">&quot;Judge, my lady, if this command does not concern service.&quot;</p>

<p class="normal">Olenka cast her eyes over the letter, and read as follows:&mdash;</p>
<div class="letter">

<p class="normal">&quot;Since it has come to our knowledge that Billevich, the sword-bearer of
Rossyeni, intends to leave our residence in secret, with plans hostile
to us,&mdash;namely, to excite his acquaintances, connections, relatives,
and clients to rebellion against his Swedish Majesty and us,&mdash;we
recommend to the officers remaining in garrison at Taurogi to guard
Billevich and his niece as hostages and prisoners of war, and not to
permit their flight under pain of loss of honor and court-martial,&quot;
etc.</p>
</div>

<p class="normal">&quot;The order came from the first stopping-place after the departure of
the prince,&quot; said Kettling; &quot;therefore it is in writing.&quot;</p>

<p class="normal">&quot;The will of God be done!&quot; said Olenka, after a while. &quot;It is
accomplished!&quot;</p>

<p class="normal">Kettling felt that he ought to go; still he did not stir. His pale lips
moved from moment to moment, as if he wished to say something and could
not get the voice.</p>

<p class="normal">He was oppressed by the desire to fall at her feet and implore
forgiveness; but on the other hand he felt that she had enough of her
own misfortune, and he found a certain wild delight in this,&mdash;that he
was suffering and would suffer without complaint.</p>

<p class="normal">At last he bowed and went out in silence; but in the corridor he tore
the bandages from his fresh wound, and fell fainting to the floor. When
an hour later the palace guard found him lying near the staircase and
took him to the barracks, he became seriously ill and did not leave his
bed for a fortnight.</p>

<p class="normal">Olenka, after the departure of Kettling, remained some time as if
dazed. Death had seemed to her more likely to come than that refusal;
and therefore, at first, in spite of all her firm temper of spirit,
strength, energy failed her; she felt weak, like an ordinary woman, and
though she repeated unconsciously, &quot;Let the will of God be done!&quot;
sorrow for the disappointment rose above her resignation, copious and
bitter tears flowed from her eyes.</p>

<p class="normal">At that moment her uncle entered, and looking at his niece, divined at
once that she had evil news to impart; hence he asked quickly,&mdash;</p>

<p class="normal">&quot;For God's sake, what is it?&quot;</p>

<p class="normal">&quot;Kettling refuses!&quot;</p>

<p class="normal">&quot;All here are ruffians, scoundrels, arch-curs! How is this? And he will
not help?&quot;</p>

<p class="normal">&quot;Not only will he not help,&quot; answered she, complaining like a little
child, &quot;but he says that he will prevent, even should it come to him to
die.&quot;</p>

<p class="normal">&quot;Why? by the Lord's wounds, why?&quot;</p>

<p class="normal">&quot;For such is our fate! Kettling is not a traitor; but such is our fate,
for we are the most unhappy of all people.&quot;</p>

<p class="normal">&quot;May the thunderbolts crush all those heretics!&quot; cried Billevich. &quot;They
attack virtue, plunder, steal, imprison. Would that all might perish!
It is not for honest people to live in such times!&quot;</p>

<p class="normal">Here he began to walk with hurried step through the chamber,
threatening with his fists; at last he said, gritting his teeth,&mdash;</p>

<p class="normal">&quot;The voevoda of Vilna was better; I prefer a thousand times even Kmita
to these perfumed ruffians without honor and conscience.&quot;</p>

<p class="normal">When Olenka said nothing, but began to cry still more, Billevich grew
mild, and after a while said,&mdash;</p>

<p class="normal">&quot;Do not weep. Kmita came to my mind only because that he at least would
have been able to wrest us out of this Babylonian captivity. He would
have given it to all the Brauns, Kettlings, Pattersons, to Boguslav
himself! But they are all the same type of traitors. Weep not! You can
do nothing with weeping; here it is necessary to counsel. Kettling will
not help,&mdash;may he be twisted! We will do without him. You have as it
were a man's courage in you, but in difficulty you are only able to
sob. What does Kettling say?&quot;</p>

<p class="normal">&quot;He says that the prince has given orders to guard us as prisoners of
war, fearing, Uncle, that you would collect a party and go to the
confederates.&quot;</p>

<p class="normal">Billevich put his hands on his hips: &quot;Ha, ha, ha! he is afraid, the
scoundrel! And he is right, for I will do so, as God is in heaven.&quot;</p>

<p class="normal">&quot;Having a command relating to service, Kettling must carry it out on
his honor.&quot;</p>

<p class="normal">&quot;Well! we shall get on without the assistance of heretics.&quot;</p>

<p class="normal">Olenka wiped her eyes. &quot;And does my uncle think it is possible?&quot;</p>

<p class="normal">&quot;I think it is necessary; and if it is necessary it is possible, though
we had to let ourselves down by ropes from these windows.&quot;</p>

<p class="normal">&quot;It was wrong for me to shed tears; let us make plans as quickly as we
can.&quot;</p>

<p class="normal">Her tears were dry, her brows contracted again from thought and her
former endurance and energy.</p>

<p class="normal">It appeared, in fact, that Billevich could find no help, and that the
imagination of the lady was much richer in means. But it was difficult
for her, since it was clear that they were guarded carefully.</p>

<p class="normal">They determined, therefore, not to try before the first news came from
Boguslav. In this they placed all their hope, trusting that the
punishment of God would come on the traitor and the dishonorable man.
Besides, he might fall, he might be confined to his bed, he might be
killed by Sapyeha, and then without fail there would rise in all
Taurogi a panic, and the gate would not be guarded so carefully.</p>

<p class="normal">&quot;I know Sapyeha,&quot; said Billevich, comforting himself and Olenka; &quot;he is
a slow warrior, but accurate and wonderfully stubborn. An example of
this, his loyalty to the king and country. He pledged and sold
everything, and thus has gained a power before which Boguslav is as
nothing. One is a dignified senator, the other a fop; one a true
Catholic, the other a heretic; one is cleverness itself, the other a
water-burner. With whom may victory and the blessing of God be? This
Radzivill might well yield to Sapyeha's day. Just as if there are not
punishment and justice in this world! We will wait for news, and pray
for Sapyeha's success.&quot;</p>

<p class="normal">Then they began to wait; but a month passed&mdash;long, wearisome for
afflicted hearts&mdash;before the first courier came; and he was sent not to
Taurogi, but to Steinbock in Royal Prussia.</p>

<p class="normal">Kettling, who from the time of the last conversation dared not appear
before Olenka's eyes, sent her at once a card with the following
announcement:&mdash;</p>
<div class="letter">

<p class="normal">&quot;Prince Boguslav has defeated Pan Kryshtof Sapyeha near Bransk; some
squadrons of cavalry and infantry are cut to pieces. He is marching on
Tykotsin, where Horotkyevich is stationed.&quot;</p>
</div>

<p class="normal">For Olenka this was simply a thunderbolt. The greatness of a leader and
the bravery of a knight meant for her the same thing. Since she had
seen Boguslav, at Taurogi, overcoming the most valiant knights with
ease, she imagined him to herself, especially after that news, as an
evil but invincible power, against which no one could stand.</p>

<p class="normal">The hope that Boguslav might be defeated died in her completely. In
vain did her uncle quiet her and comfort her with this,&mdash;that the
prince had not yet met Sapyeha; in vain did he guarantee to her that
the very dignity of hetman with which the king had invested him
recently, must give positive preponderance over Boguslav; she did not
believe this, she dared not.</p>

<p class="normal">&quot;Who can conquer Boguslav; who can meet him?&quot; asked she, continually.</p>

<p class="normal">Further news seemed to confirm her fears.</p>

<p class="normal">A few days later Kettling sent another card with information touching
the defeat of Horotkyevich and the capture of Tykotsin. &quot;All
Podlyasye,&quot; writes he, &quot;is in the hands of the prince, who, without
waiting for Sapyeha, is moving against him with forced marches.&quot;</p>

<p class="normal">&quot;And Sapyeha will be routed!&quot; thought the maiden.</p>

<p class="normal">Meanwhile news from other directions flew to them, like a swallow
heralding spring-time. To that seashore of the Commonwealth this news
came late; but because of its lateness it was decked in all the rainbow
gleams of wonderful legend from the first ages of Christianity, when
saints proclaiming truth and justice still travelled over the earth.</p>

<p class="normal">&quot;Chenstohova! Chenstohova!&quot; was repeated by every mouth.</p>

<p class="normal">Ice thawed from hearts which bloomed like flowers in the earth warmed
by the sun of spring. &quot;Chenstohova has defended itself. Men had seen
the Queen of Poland Herself (the Virgin Mary) shielding the walls with
Her heavenly mantle; the bombs of the robbers at Her holy feet,
crouching like house-dogs; the hands of the Swedes were withered, their
muskets grew fast to their faces, till they retreated in terror and
shame.&quot;</p>

<p class="normal">Men, strangers to one another, when they heard these tidings fell the
one into the embraces of the other, weeping from delight. Others
complained that the tidings came too late.</p>

<p class="normal">&quot;But we were here in weeping,&quot; said they, &quot;we were in pain, we lived in
torment so long, when we should have been rejoicing.&quot;</p>

<p class="normal">Then it began to roar through the whole Commonwealth, and terrible
thunders were heard from the Euxine to the Baltic, so that the waves of
both seas were trembling; then faithful people, pious people rose up
like a storm in defence of their queen. Consolation entered all hearts,
all eyes were flashing with fire; what hitherto had seemed terrible and
invincible grew small in their eyes.</p>

<p class="normal">&quot;Who will finish him?&quot; said Billevich. &quot;Who will be his equal? Now do
you know who? The Most Holy Lady.&quot;</p>

<p class="normal">The old man and his niece lay for whole days in the form of a cross,
thanking God for his mercy on the Commonwealth, and doubting their own
rescue no longer.</p>

<p class="normal">But for a long period there was silence concerning Boguslav, as if he
with all his forces had fallen into water. The officers remaining in
Taurogi began to be disquieted and to think of their uncertain future.
They would have preferred defeat to that deep silence. But no news
could come, for just then the terrible Babinich was rushing with his
Tartars in front of the prince and stopping all couriers.</p>
<br>
<br>
<br>
<br>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
