<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXXV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-35" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">XXXV</h2>

<p class="normal">To the supper, besides the sword-bearer of Rossyeni and Olenka, were
invited the most distinguished officers of Kyedani and some attendants
of Prince Boguslav. He came himself in such array and so lordly that he
attracted all eyes. His wig was dressed in beautiful waving curls; his
face in delicacy of color called to mind milk and roses; his small
mustache seemed to be of silken hair, and his eyes stars. He was
dressed in black, in a kaftan made of stripes of silk and velvet, the
sleeves of which were slashed and fastened together the length of the
arm. Around his neck he had a broad collar, of the most marvellous
Brabant lace, of inestimable value, and at the wrists ruffles of the
same material. A gold chain fell on his breast, and over the right
shoulder along the whole kaftan went to his left hip a sword-strap of
Dutch leather, so set with diamonds that it looked like a strip of
changing light. The hilt of his sword glittered in like manner, and
in his shoe-buckles gleamed the two largest diamonds, as large as
hazel-nuts. The whole figure seemed imposing, and as noble as it was
beautiful.</p>

<p class="normal">In one hand he held a lace handkerchief; in the other he carried,
according to the fashion of the time, on his sword-hilt, a hat adorned
with curling black ostrich feathers of uncommon length.</p>

<p class="normal">All, not excepting Prince Yanush, looked at him with wonder and
admiration. His youthful years came to the memory of the prince
voevoda, when he in the same way surpassed all at the French court with
his beauty and his wealth. Those years were now far away, but it seemed
at that moment to the hetman that he was living again in that brilliant
cavalier who bore the same name.</p>

<p class="normal">Prince Yanush grew vivacious, and in passing he touched with his index
finger the breast of his cousin.</p>

<p class="normal">"Light strikes from you as from the moon," said he. "Is it not for
Panna Billevich that you are so arrayed?"</p>

<p class="normal">"The moon enters easily everywhere," answered Boguslav, boastingly.</p>

<p class="normal">And then he began to talk with Ganhoff, near whom he halted, perhaps of
purpose to exhibit himself the better, for Ganhoff was a man
marvellously ugly; he had a face dark and pitted with small-pox, a nose
like the beak of a hawk, and mustaches curled upward. He looked like
the spirit of darkness, but Boguslav near him like the spirit of light.</p>

<p class="normal">The ladies entered,--Pani Korf and Olenka. Boguslav cast a swift glance
at Olenka, and bowed promptly to Pani Korf; he was just putting his
fingers to his mouth, to send in cavalier fashion a kiss to Panna
Billevich, when he saw her exquisite beauty, both proud and dignified.
He changed his tactics in an instant, caught his hat in his right hand,
and advancing toward the lady bowed so low that he almost bent in two;
the curls of his wig fell on both sides of his shoulders, his sword
took a position parallel with the floor, and he remained thus, moving
purposely his cap and sweeping the floor in front of Olenka with the
ostrich feather, in sign of respect. A more courtly homage he could not
have given to the Queen of France. Panna Billevich, who had learned of
his coming, divined at once who stood before her; therefore seizing her
robe with the tips of her fingers, she gave him in return a courtesy
equally profound.</p>

<p class="normal">All wondered at the beauty and grace of manners of the two, which was
evident from the greeting itself,--grace not over usual in Kyedani,
for, as a Wallachian, Yanush's princess was more in love with eastern
splendor than with courtliness, and Yanush's daughter was still a
little girl.</p>

<p class="normal">Boguslav now raised his head, shook the curls of his wig over his
shoulders, and striking his heels together with force, moved quickly
toward Olenka; at the same time he threw his hat to a page and gave her
his hand.</p>

<p class="normal">"I do not believe my eyes, and see as it were in a dream what I see,"
said he, conducting her to the table; "but tell me, beautiful goddess,
by what miracle you have descended from Olympus to Kyedani?"</p>

<p class="normal">"Though simply a noble woman, not a goddess," answered Olenka, "I am
not so simple-minded as to take the words of your highness as anything
beyond courtesy."</p>

<p class="normal">"Though I tried to be politest of all, your glass would tell more than
I."</p>

<p class="normal">"It would not tell more, but more truly," answered Olenka, pursing her
mouth according to the fashion of the time.</p>

<p class="normal">"Were there a mirror in the room, I would conduct you to it
straightway; meanwhile look into my eyes, and you will see if their
admiration is not sincere."</p>

<p class="normal">Here Boguslav bent his head before Olenka; his eyes gleamed large,
black as velvet, sweet, piercing, and at the same time burning. Under
the influence of their fire the maiden's face was covered with a purple
blush. She dropped her glance and pushed away somewhat, for she felt
that with his arm Boguslav pressed lightly her arm to his side.</p>

<p class="normal">So he came to the table. He sat near her, and it was evident that in
truth her beauty had made an uncommon impression on him. He expected to
find a woman of the nobles, shapely as a deer, laughing and playful as
a nutcracker, ruddy as a poppy-flower; but he found a proud lady, in
whose black brows unbending will was revealed, in whose eyes were
reason and dignity, in whose whole face was the transparent repose of a
child; and at the same time she was so noble in bearing, so charming
and wonderful, that at any king's castle she might be the object of
homage and courtship from the first cavaliers of the realm.</p>

<p class="normal">Her beauty aroused admiration and desire; but at the same time there
was in it a majesty which curbed these, so that despite himself
Boguslav thought, "I pressed her arm too early; with such a one
subtlety is needed, not haste!"</p>

<p class="normal">Nevertheless he determined to possess her heart, and he felt a wild
delight at the thought that the moment would come when the majesty of
the maiden and that purest beauty would yield to his love or his
hatred. The threatening face of Kmita stood athwart these imaginings;
but to that insolent man this was but an incentive the more. Under the
influence of these feelings he grew radiant; blood began to play in
him, as in an Oriental steed; all his faculties flashed up uncommonly,
and light gleamed from his whole form as from his diamonds.</p>

<p class="normal">Conversation at the table became general, or rather it was turned into
a universal chorus of praise and flattery of Boguslav, which the
brilliant cavalier heard with a smile, but without overweening delight,
since it was common and of daily occurrence. They spoke first of his
military deeds and duels. The names of the conquered princes,
margraves, barons, streamed as if out of a sleeve. He threw in
carelessly from time to time one more. The listeners were astonished;
Prince Yanush stroked his long mustaches with delight, and at last
Ganhoff said,--</p>

<p class="normal">"Even if fortune and birth did not stand in my way, I should not like
to stand in the way of your highness, and the only wonder to me is that
men of such daring have been found."</p>

<p class="normal">"What is to be done, Ganhoff? There are men of iron visage and wild-cat
glance, whose appearance alone causes terror; but God has denied me
that power,--even a young lady would not be frightened at my face."</p>

<p class="normal">"Just as darkness is not afraid of a torch," said Pani Korf, simpering
and posing, "until the torch burns in it."</p>

<p class="normal">Boguslav laughed, and Pani Korf talked on without ceasing to pose,--</p>

<p class="normal">"Duels concern soldiers more, but we ladies would be glad to hear of
your love affairs, tidings of which have come to us."</p>

<p class="normal">"Untrue ones, my lady benefactress, untrue,--they have all merely grown
on the road. Proposals were made for me, of course. Her Grace, the
Queen of France was so kind--"</p>

<p class="normal">"With the Princess de Rohan," added Yanush.</p>

<p class="normal">"With another too,--De la Forse," added Boguslav; "but even a king
cannot command his own heart to love, and we do not need, praise be to
God, to seek wealth in France, hence there could be no bread out of
that flour. Graceful ladies they were, 'tis true, and beautiful beyond
imagination; but we have still more beautiful, and I need not go out of
this hall to find such."</p>

<p class="normal">Here he looked long at Olenka, who, feigning not to hear, began to say
something to the sword-bearer; and Pani Korf raised her voice again,--</p>

<p class="normal">"There is no lack here of beauties; still there are none who in fortune
and birth could be the equal of your highness."</p>

<p class="normal">"Permit me, my benefactress, to differ," responded Boguslav, with
animation; "for first I do not think that a Polish noble lady is
inferior in any way to a Rohan or De la Forse; second, it is not a
novelty for the Radzivills to marry a noble woman, since history gives
many examples of that. I assure you, my benefactress, that that noble
lady who should become Radzivill would have the step and precedence of
princesses in France."</p>

<p class="normal">"An affable lord!" whispered the sword-bearer to Olenka.</p>

<p class="normal">"That is how I have always understood," continued Boguslav, "though
more than once have I been ashamed of Polish nobles, when I compare
them with those abroad; for never would that have happened there which
has happened in this Commonwealth,--that all should desert their king,
nay, even men are ready to lay in wait for his life. A French noble may
permit the worst action, but he will not betray his king--"</p>

<p class="normal">Those present began to look at one another and at the prince with
astonishment. Prince Yanush frowned and grew stern; but Olenka fixed
her blue eyes on Boguslav's face with an expression of admiration and
thankfulness.</p>

<p class="normal">"Pardon, your highness," said Boguslav, turning to Yanush, who was not
able yet to recover himself, "I know that you could not act otherwise,
for all Lithuania would have perished if you had followed my advice;
but respecting you as older, and loving you as a brother, I shall not
cease to dispute with you touching Yan Kazimir. We are among ourselves,
I speak therefore what I think. Our insufficiently lamented king, good,
kind, pious, and doubly dear to me,--I was the first of Poles to attend
him when he was freed from durance in France. I was almost a child at
the time, but all the more I shall never forget him; and gladly would I
give my blood to protect him, at least from those who plot against his
sacred person."</p>

<p class="normal">Though Yanush understood Boguslav's game now, still it seemed to him
too bold and too hazardous for such a trifling object; therefore
without hiding his displeasure he said,--</p>

<p class="normal">"In God's name, of what designs against the safety of our ex-king are
you speaking? Who cherishes them, where could such a monster be found
among the Polish people? True as life, such a thing has not happened in
the Commonwealth since the beginning of the world."</p>

<p class="normal">Boguslav hung his head.</p>

<p class="normal">"Not longer than a month ago," said he, with sadness in his voice, "on
the road between Podlyasye and Electoral Prussia, when I was going to
Tanrogi, there came to me a noble of respectable family. That noble,
not being aware of my real love for our gracious king, and thinking
that I, like others, was an enemy of his, promised for a considerable
reward to go to Silesia, carry off Yan Kazimir and deliver him to the
Swedes, either living or dead."</p>

<p class="normal">All were dumb with amazement.</p>

<p class="normal">"And when with anger and disgust I rejected such an offer," said
Boguslav, in conclusion, "that man with brazen forehead said, 'I will
go to Radzeyovski; he will buy and pay me gold by the pound.'"</p>

<p class="normal">"I am not a friend of the ex-king," said Yanush; "but if the noble had
made me a proposal like that, I should have placed him by a wall, and
in front of him six musketeers."</p>

<p class="normal">"At the first moment I wanted to do so, but did not," answered
Boguslav, "as the conversation was with four eyes, and people might cry
out against the violence and tyranny of the Radzivills. I frightened
him, however, by saying that Radzeyovski and the King of Sweden, even
Hmelnitski, would put him to death for such a proposal; in one word, I
brought that criminal so far that he abandoned his plan."</p>

<p class="normal">"That was not right; it was not proper to let him go living, he
deserved at least the impaling-stake," cried Korf.</p>

<p class="normal">Boguslav turned suddenly to Yanush.</p>

<p class="normal">"I cherish also the hope that punishment will not miss him, and first I
propose that he perish not by an ordinary death; but your highness
alone is able to punish him, for he is your attendant and your
colonel."</p>

<p class="normal">"In God's name! my colonel? Who is he,--who? Speak!</p>

<p class="normal">"His name is Kmita," said Boguslav.</p>

<p class="normal">"Kmita!" repeated all, with astonishment.</p>

<p class="normal">"That is not true!" cried Panna Billevich at once, rising from her
chair, with flashing eyes and heaving breast.</p>

<p class="normal">Deep silence followed. Some had not recovered yet from the fearful news
given by Boguslav; others were astonished at the boldness of that lady
who had dared to throw a lie in the eyes of Prince Boguslav; the
sword-bearer began to stutter, "Olenka! Olenka!" But Boguslav veiled
his face in sorrow, and said without anger,--</p>

<p class="normal">"If he is your relative or betrothed, I am grieved that I mentioned
this fact; but cast him out of your heart, for he is not worthy of you,
O lady."</p>

<p class="normal">She remained yet a moment in pain, flushed, and astonished; but by
degrees her face became cool, until it was cold and pale. She sank down
in the chair, and said,--</p>

<p class="normal">"Forgive me, your highness, I made an unseemly contradiction. All is
possible for that man."</p>

<p class="normal">"May God punish me if I feel aught save pity!" answered Boguslav,
mildly.</p>

<p class="normal">"Ho was the betrothed of this lady," said Prince Yanush, "and I myself
made the match. He was a young man, hot-headed; he caused a world of
turmoil. I saved him from justice, for he was a good soldier. I saw
that he was lawless, and would be; but that he, a noble, could think of
such infamy, I did not expect."</p>

<p class="normal">"He is an evil man; that I knew long since," said Ganhoff.</p>

<p class="normal">"And why did you not forewarn me?" inquired Yanush, in a tone of
reproach.</p>

<p class="normal">"I was afraid that your highness might suspect me of envy, for he had
everywhere the first step before me."</p>

<p class="normal">"<i>Horribile dictu et auditu</i> (horrible in the speaking and the
hearing)," said Korf.</p>

<p class="normal">"Gracious gentlemen," exclaimed Boguslav, "let us give peace to him. If
it is grievous for you to hear of this, what must it be for Panna
Billevich?"</p>

<p class="normal">"Your highness, be pleased not to consider me," said Olenka; "I can
listen to everything now."</p>

<p class="normal">The evening was drawing toward its close. Water was given for the
washing of fingers; then Prince Yanush rose first and gave his arm to
Pani Korf, and Prince Boguslav to Olenka.</p>

<p class="normal">"God has punished the traitor already," said he to her; "for whoso has
lost you has lost heaven. It is less than two hours since I first saw
you, charming lady, and I should be glad to see you forever, not in
pain and in tears, but in joy and in happiness."</p>

<p class="normal">"I thank your highness," answered Olenka.</p>

<p class="normal">After the departure of the ladies the men returned to the table to seek
consolation in cups, which went around frequently. Prince Boguslav
drank deeply, for he was satisfied with himself. Prince Yanush
conversed with the sword-bearer of Rossyeni.</p>

<p class="normal">"I march to-morrow with the army for Podlyasye," said he. "A Swedish
garrison will come to Kyedani. God knows when I shall return. You
cannot stay here with the maiden; it would not be a fit place for her
among soldiers. You will both go with Prince Boguslav to Taurogi, where
she may stay with my wife among her ladies in waiting."</p>

<p class="normal">"Your highness," answered the sword-bearer, "God has given us a corner
of our own; why should we go to strange places? It is a great kindness
of your highness to think of us: but not wishing to abuse favor, we
prefer to return to our own roof."</p>

<p class="normal">The prince was unable to explain to the sword-bearer all the reasons
for which he would not let Olenka out of his hands at any price; but
some of them he told with all the rough outspokenness of a magnate.</p>

<p class="normal">"If you wish to accept it as a favor, all the better, but I will tell
you that it is precaution as well. You will be a hostage there; you
will be responsible to me for all the Billeviches, who I know well do
not rank themselves among my friends, and are ready to raise Jmud in
rebellion when I am gone. Advise them to sit in peace, and do nothing
against the Swedes, for your head and that of your niece will answer
for their acts."</p>

<p class="normal">At this juncture patience was evidently lacking to the sword-bearer,
for he answered quickly,--</p>

<p class="normal">"It would be idle for me to appeal to my rights as a noble. Power is on
the side of your highness, and it is all one to me where I must sit in
prison; I prefer even that place to this."</p>

<p class="normal">"Enough!" said the prince, threateningly.</p>

<p class="normal">"What is enough, is enough!" answered the sword-bearer. "God grant to
this violence an end, and to justice new power. Speaking briefly, do
not threaten, your highness, for I fear not."</p>

<p class="normal">Evidently Boguslav saw lightnings of anger gleaming on the face of
Yanush, for he approached quickly.</p>

<p class="normal">"What is the question?" asked he, standing between them.</p>

<p class="normal">"I was telling the hetman," said the sword-bearer, with irritation,
"that I choose imprisonment in Taurogi rather than in Kyedani."</p>

<p class="normal">"In Taurogi there is for you not a prison, but my house, in which you
will be as if at home. I know that the hetman chooses to see in you a
hostage; I see only a dear guest."</p>

<p class="normal">"I thank your highness," answered the sword-bearer.</p>

<p class="normal">"And I thank you. Let us strike glasses and drink together, for they
say that a libation must be made to friendship, or it will wither at
its birth."</p>

<p class="normal">So saying, Boguslav conducted the sword-bearer to the table, and they
fell to touching glasses and drinking to each other often and
frequently. An hour later the sword-bearer turned with somewhat
uncertain step toward his room, repeating in an undertone,--</p>

<p class="normal">"An amiable lord! A worthy lord! A more honest one could not be found
with a lantern,--gold, pure gold! I would gladly shed my blood for
him!"</p>

<p class="normal">Meanwhile the cousins found themselves alone. They had something yet to
talk over, and besides, certain letters came; a page was sent to bring
these from Ganhoff.</p>

<p class="normal">"Evidently," said Yanush, "there is not a word of truth in what you
reported of Kmita?"</p>

<p class="normal">"Evidently. You know best yourself. But, well? Acknowledge, was not
Mazarin right? With one move to take terrible vengeance on an enemy,
and to make a breach in that beautiful fortress,--well, who could do
that? This is called intrigue worthy of the first court in the world!
But that Panna Billevich is a pearl, and charming too, lordly and
distinguished as if of princely blood. I thought I should spring from
my skin."</p>

<p class="normal">"Remember that you have given your word,--remember that he will ruin us
if he publishes those letters."</p>

<p class="normal">"What brows! What a queenly look, so that respect seizes one! Whence is
there such a girl, such well-nigh royal majesty? I saw once in Antwerp,
splendidly embroidered on Gobelin tapestry Diana hunting the curious
Actæon with dogs. She was like this one as cup is like cup."</p>

<p class="normal">"Look out that Kmita does not publish the letters, for then the dogs
would gnaw us to death."</p>

<p class="normal">"Not true! I will turn Kmita into an Actæon, and hunt him to death. I
have struck him down on two fields, and it will come to battle between
us yet."</p>

<p class="normal">Further conversation was interrupted by the entrance of a page with a
letter. The voevoda of Vilna took the letter in his hand and made the
sign of the cross. He did that always to guard against evil tidings;
then, instead of opening, he began to examine it carefully. All at once
his countenance changed.</p>

<p class="normal">"Sapyeha's arms are on the seal!" exclaimed he; "it is from the voevoda
of Vityebsk."</p>

<p class="normal">"Open quickly!" said Boguslav.</p>

<p class="normal">The hetman opened and began to read, interrupting himself from time to
time with exclamations.</p>

<p class="normal">"He is marching on Podlyasye! He asks if I have no messages for
Tykotsin! An insult to me! Still worse; for listen to what he writes
further,--</p>
<div class="letter">

<p class="normal">"'Do you wish civil war, your highness? do you wish to sink one more
sword in the bosom of the mother? If you do, come to Podlyasye. I am
waiting for you, and I trust that God will punish your pride with my
hands. But if you have pity on the country, if conscience stirs within
you, if you value your deeds of past times and you wish to make
reparation, the field is open before you. Instead of beginning a civil
war, summon the general militia, raise the peasants, and strike the
Swedes while Pontus, feeling secure, suspects nothing and is exercising
no vigilance. From Hovanski you will have no hindrance, for reports
come to me from Moscow that they are thinking there of an expedition
against Livonia, though they keep that a secret. Besides, if Hovanski
wished to undertake anything I hold him in check, and if I could have
sincere trust I would certainly help you with all my forces to save the
country. All depends on you, for there is time yet to turn from the
road and efface your faults. Then it will appear clearly that you did
not accept Swedish protection for personal purposes, but to avert final
defeat from Lithuania. May God thus inspire you; for this I implore him
daily, though your highness is pleased to accuse me of envy.</p>

<p class="normal">"'P. S. I have heard that the siege of Nyesvyej is raised, and that
Prince Michael will join us as soon as he repairs his losses. See, your
highness, how nobly your family act, and consider their example; in
every case remember that you have now a boat and a carriage.'<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-28" id="noteref-28" epub:type="noteref">28</a></p>
</div>

<p class="normal">"Have you heard?" asked Prince Yanush, when he had finished reading.</p>

<p class="normal">"I have heard--and what?" answered Boguslav, looking quickly at his
cousin.</p>

<p class="normal">"It would be necessary to abjure all, leave all, tear down our work
with our own hands."</p>

<p class="normal">"Break with the powerful Karl Gustav, and seize the exiled Yan Kazimir
by the feet, that he might deign to forgive and receive us back to his
service, and also implore Sapyeha's intercession."</p>

<p class="normal">Yanush's face was filled with blood.</p>

<p class="normal">"Have you considered how he writes to me: 'Correct yourself, and I will
forgive you,' as a lord to an underling."</p>

<p class="normal">"He would write differently if six thousand sabres were hanging over
his neck."</p>

<p class="normal">"Still--" Here Prince Yanush fell to thinking gloomily.</p>

<p class="normal">"Still, what?"</p>

<p class="normal">"Perhaps for the country it would be salvation to do as Sapyeha
advises."</p>

<p class="normal">"But for you,--for me, for the Radzivills?"</p>

<p class="normal">Yanush made no answer; he dropped his head on his fists and thought.</p>

<p class="normal">"Let it be so!" said he, at last; "let it be accomplished!"</p>

<p class="normal">"What have you decided?"</p>

<p class="normal">"To-morrow I march on Podlyasye, and in a week I shall strike on
Sapyeha."</p>

<p class="normal">"You are a Radzivill!" cried Boguslav. And they grasped each other's
hands.</p>

<p class="normal">After a while Boguslav went to rest. Yanush remained alone. Once, and a
second time he passed through the room with heavy steps. At last he
clapped his hands. A page entered the room.</p>

<p class="normal">"Let the astrologer come in an hour to me with a ready figure," said
he.</p>

<p class="normal">The page went out, and the prince began again to walk and repeat his
Calvinistic prayers. After that he sang a psalm in an undertone,
stopping frequently, for his breath failed him, and looking from time
to time through the window at the stars twinkling in the sky.</p>

<p class="normal">By degrees the lights were quenched in the castle; but besides the
astrologer and the prince one other person was watching in a room, and
that was Olenka Billevich.</p>

<p class="normal">Kneeling before her bed, she clasped both hands over her head, and
whispered with closed eyes,--</p>

<p class="normal">"Have mercy on us! Have mercy on us!"</p>

<p class="normal">The first time since Kmita's departure she would not, she could not
pray for him.</p>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
