<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Notes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="notes" epub:type="introduction">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Notes</h2>
			<h3>POLISH ALPHABET.</h3>
			<p>Since the Polish alphabet has many peculiar phonetic combinations which are difficult to one who does not know the language, it was decided to transliterate the names of persons and places in which such combinations occur in this book. The following are the letters and combinations which are met with most frequently;⁠—</p>
			<table cellpadding="10" style="width:60%; margin-left:20%">
				<tr>
					<td>Polish Letters.</td>
					<td>English Sounds.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>
						<i>c</i>
					</td>
					<td>
						<i>ts</i>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>
						<i>ch</i>
					</td>
					<td>
						<i>h</i>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>
						<i>cz</i>
					</td>
					<td>
						<i>ch</i>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>
						<i>rz</i>
					</td>
					<td><i>r</i> followed by the French <i>j</i></td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>
						<i>sz</i>
					</td>
					<td>
						<i>sh</i>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>
						<i>szcz</i>
					</td>
					<td>
						<i>shch</i>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>
						<i>w</i>
					</td>
					<td>
						<i>v</i>
					</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>
						<i>
							<span style="font-family:'Courier New'">ż</span>
						</i>
					</td>
					<td>
						<i>j</i>
					</td>
				</tr>
			</table>
			<p>In this transliteration <i>ch</i> retains its ordinary English sound. <i>J</i> is the French <i>j</i>; the vowels <i>e</i>, <i>i</i>, <i>u</i>, are, respectively, <i>ai</i> in “bait,” <i>ee</i> in “beet,” <i>oo</i> in “pool,” when long; when short, “bet,” “bit,” “put” would represent their values. <i>I</i>, when unaccented and followed by a vowel, is sounded as <i>y</i>.</p>
			<p>The following names will illustrate the method of this transliteration:⁠—</p>
			<table cellpadding="10" style="width:60%; margin-left:20%">
				<tr>
					<td>Polish Form of Name.</td>
					<td>Form in Transliteration.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>Potocki</td>
					<td>Pototski</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>Chudzynski</td>
					<td>Hudzynski</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>Czarnkowski</td>
					<td>Charnkovski</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>Rzendzian</td>
					<td>Jendzian</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>Bleszynski</td>
					<td>Bleshyuski</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>Szandarowski</td>
					<td>Shandarovski</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>Wlostowski</td>
					<td>Vlostovski</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>
						<span style="font-family:'Courier New'">Żyromski</span>
					</td>
					<td>Jyromski</td>
				</tr>
			</table>
			<p>In Jendzian and Jechytsa,⁠—only names, as I believe, beginning in Polish with <i>rz</i> in this work,⁠—the initial <i>r</i> has been omitted in the transliteration on account of the extreme difficulty, for any one not a Pole, of pronouncing <i>r</i> followed by the French <i>j</i>.</p>
			<br/>
			<h3>ACCENT.</h3>
			<p>All Polish words, with few exceptions, are accented on the syllable next the last, the penult. The exceptions are foreign names, some compounds, some words with enclitics. Polish names of men and places are generally accented on the penult.</p>
			<hr class="W10"/>
			<h2>MAP OF THE POLISH COMMONWEALTH.</h2>
			<p>This map, though diminutive, contains data through which the reader may see, at least in part, the historical course of the Commonwealth.</p>
			<p>The territory is indicated which was lost to the Teutonic Knights, and which became later the kingdom of Prussia. On the east are indicated the Russian lands which became connected with Poland, and which rose against Polish rule in 1618. These lands are included between the lines running north and south on the map, and which are designated, respectively, “Western limit of Russia before the Tartar invasion,” “Eastern limit of the Polish Commonwealth at the accession of Yan Kazimir.”</p>
			<p>The names of more important places mentioned in <span class="sc">Fire and Sword</span> and <span class="sc">The Deluge</span> appear also on the map. A few of these names are not so familiar in their Polish forms, which I have preserved; therefore the German is given, as follows:⁠—</p>
			<table cellpadding="10" style="width:60%; margin-left:20%">
				<tr>
					<td>Polish.</td>
					<td>German.</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>Elblang</td>
					<td>Elbing</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>Glogov</td>
					<td>Glogau</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>Gnyezno</td>
					<td>Gnesen</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>Taurogi</td>
					<td>Tauroggen</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>Tyltsa</td>
					<td>Tilsit</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>Opol</td>
					<td>Oppeln</td>
				</tr>
				<tr>
					<td>Poznan</td>
					<td>Posen</td>
				</tr>
			</table>
			<hr class="W10"/>
			<h2>TITLES OF RANK AND ADDRESS.</h2>
			<p>The highest military rank in Poland was grand hetman; next in order came field-hetman, which has appeared inadvertently in these volumes as full hetman. “Your worthiness,” so frequently used, would be better translated “your dignity,” “dignity” being used in the sense of “office.” The terms Pan, Pani, and Panna are applied, respectively, to a gentleman, a married lady, and an unmarried lady; they are now equivalent to <abbr>Mr.</abbr>, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> or Madame, and Miss.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
